<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-38" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s departure from England⁠—and it seemed as if its very map in my mind had become dismally empty⁠—was not my only anxiety. My solicitors had hitherto been prompt; their remittances almost monotonously identical in amount. But my quarterly allowance on Midsummer Day, had been followed by a letter a week or two after her goodbye. It seemed to be in excellent English, and yet it was all but unintelligible to me. Every rereading of it⁠—the paper had apparently been dipped in water and dried⁠—increased its obscurity and my alarm. I knew nothing about money matters, and the encyclopædia I consulted only made me more dejected and confused. I remembered with remorse my poor father’s last troubles. To answer the Harrises was impossible, and further study of their letter soon became unnecessary, for I had learned it by heart.</p>
			<p>The one thing certain was that Fanny’s wolf had begun scratching at my door: that my income was in imminent danger. I had long since squandered the greater part of what remained out of my savings (after Fanny had helped herself) on presents and fallals; merely, I am afraid, to show <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie that I, too, could be extravagant. How much I owed her I could not even conjecture, and had not dared to inquire. To ask her counsel was equally impossible. She was almost as remote from me in this respect as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, now in the centre of the Atlantic. As for Fanny, I had returned her postal orders and had heard no more.</p>
			<p>For days and days gloom hung over me like a thundercloud. Wherever I went I was followed by the spectres of the Harrises. Then, for a time, as do all things, foreboding and anxiety gradually faded off. I plunged back into the cream-bowl with the deliberate intention of drowning trouble.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, I had not forgotten Fanny’s “sinecure.” One mackerel-skied afternoon, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie and I and Susan were returning across the Park from an “At Home”⁠—“to meet Miss <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>” A small child of the house had richly entertained the company by howling with terror at sight of me, until he had been removed by his nurse. I bear him no grudge; he made a peg on which to hang Fanny’s proposal.</p>
			<p>“And what can Miss Bowater do? What are her qualifications?” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie inquired pleasantly.</p>
			<p>“She is⁠—dark and⁠—pale,” I replied, staring a little giddily out of the carriage at the sheep munching their way over the London grass.</p>
			<p>“Dark and pale?” mused <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie. “Well, that goes nearer the bone, perhaps, than medals and certificates and that sort of thing. Still, a rather Jane Eyreish kind of governess, eh, Susan?”</p>
			<p>Unfortunately I was acquainted with only one of the Miss Brontës, and that not Charlotte.</p>
			<p>“Miss Bowater is immensely <em>clever</em>, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie,” I hurried on, “and extremely popular with⁠—with the other mistresses, and that sort of thing. She’s not a bit what you might guess from what you might suppose.”</p>
			<p>“Which means, I gather,” commented <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie affably, “that Miss Bowater is the typical landlady’s daughter. A perfect angel in⁠—or out of⁠—the house, eh, Miss Innocent?”</p>
			<p>“No,” said I, “I don’t think Miss Bowater is an angel. She is so interesting, so <em>herselfish</em>, you know. She simply couldn’t be happy at Miss Stebbings’s⁠—the school where she’s teaching now. It’s not salary, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, she is thinking of⁠—just two nice children and their mother, that’s all.”</p>
			<p>This vindication of Fanny left me uncomfortably hot; I continued to gaze fixedly into the green distances of the park.</p>
			<p>Yet all was well. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie appeared to be satisfied with my testimonial. “You shall give me her address, little Binbin; and we’ll have a look at the young lady,” she decided.</p>
			<p>Yet I was none too happy at my success. Those familiar old friends of mine⁠—motives⁠—began worrying me. Would the change be really good for Fanny? Would it⁠—and I had better confess that this troubled me the most⁠—would it be really good for me? I wanted to help her; I wanted also to show her off. And what a joy it would be if she should change into the Fanny of my dreams. On the other hand, supposing she didn’t. On the whole, I rather dreaded the thought of her appearance at <abbr>No.</abbr> 2.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Susan followed me into my room. “Who <em>is</em> this Miss Bowater?” she inquired, “besides, I mean, being your landlady’s daughter, and that kind of thing?”</p>
			<p>But my further little confidences failed to satisfy her.</p>
			<p>“But why is she so <em>not</em> an angel, then? Clever and lovely⁠—it’s a rather unusual combination, you know. And yet”⁠—she reflectively smiled at me, all candour and gentleness⁠—“well not unique.”</p>
			<p>I ran away as fast as ever I could with so endearing a compliment⁠—and tossed it back again over my shoulder: “You don’t mean, Susan, that <em>you</em> are not clever?”</p>
			<p>“I do, my dear; indeed I do. I am so stupid that unless things are as plain and open as the nose on my face, I feel like suffocating. I’m dreadfully out of the fashion⁠—a horrible discredit to my sex. As for Miss Bowater, I was merely being odious, that was all. To be quite honest and hateful⁠—I didn’t like the sound of her. And Aunt Alice is so easily carried away by any new scent. If a thing’s a novelty, or just good to look at, or what they call a work of art⁠—why, the hunt’s up. There wouldn’t have been any use for the Serpent in <em>her</em> Eden. Mere things, of course, don’t matter much: except that they rather lumber up one’s rooms; and I prefer not to live in a museum. It’s when it comes to persons. Still, it isn’t as if Miss Bowater was coming here.”</p>
			<p>I remained silent, thinking this speech over. Had it, I speculated, “come to” being a “person” in my own case?</p>
			<p>“Did you meet any other interesting people there?” Miss Monnerie went on, as if casually, turning off and on the while the little cluster of coloured electric globes that was on my table. “I mean besides Miss Bowater and that poor, dreadful⁠—you know?”</p>
			<p>“No,” I said bluntly, “not many.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t mind my asking these questions? And just in exchange, you solemn thing, I’ll tell <em>you</em> a secret. It will be like shutting it up in the delightfullest, delicatest little rosebud of a box!” In that instant’s pause, it was as if a dream had passed swiftly, entrancingly, across the grave, smiling face.</p>
			<p>“Look!” she said, stooping low, and laying her slim left hand, palm downwards, across my table. I did look; and the first thing I noticed was how like herself that hand was, and how much less vigorous and formidable than Fanny’s. And then I caught her meaning.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Susan,” I cried in a woeful voice, gazing at the smouldering stones ringing that long slim third finger, “wherever I turn, I hear that.”</p>
			<p>“Hear what?”</p>
			<p>“Why, of love, I mean.”</p>
			<p>“But why, why?” the narrow brows lifted in faint distress, “I am going to be ever so happy.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, yes, I know, I know. But why can’t you be happy alone?”</p>
			<p>She looked at me, and a faint red dusked the delicate cheek. “Not <em>so</em> happy. Not <em>me</em>, I mean.”</p>
			<p>“You do love him, then?” the words jerked out.</p>
			<p>“Why, you strange thing, how curiously you speak to me. Of course I love him. I am going to marry him.”</p>
			<p>“But how do you know?” I persisted. “Does it mean more to you⁠—well⁠—than the secret of everything? I mean, what comes when one is almost nothing? Does it make you more yourself? or just break you in two? or melt you away?⁠—oh, like a mist that is gone, and to every petal and blade of grass its drop of burning water?”</p>
			<p>A shade of dismay, almost of fear⁠—the look a timid animal gives when startled⁠—stole into her eyes. “You ask such odd questions! How can I answer them? I know this⁠—I would rather die than <em>not</em>. Is that what you mean?”</p>
			<p>“Oh,” my voice fainted away⁠—disappointment, darkness, ennui; “only that!”</p>
			<p>“But what do you mean? What are you saying? Have you been told all this? It disturbs me; your face is like⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes! what is it like?” I cried in distress, myself sinking back into myself, as if hiding in a lair.</p>
			<p>“I can’t say,” she faltered. “I didn’t know.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>We talked on. But though I tried to blur over and withdraw what I had said, she remained dissatisfied. A thin edge of formality had for the moment pushed in between us.</p>
			<p>That night I addressed a belated letter to Wanderslore, reproaching <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Anon for not writing to me, telling him of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s voyage, and begging him to assure the garden-house and the fading summer flowers that they had not been deserted in my dreams.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>At a quarter to twelve one morning, soon after this, I was sitting with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie on a stool beneath Chakka’s cage, and Susan was just about to leave us⁠—was actually smoothing on the thumb of her glove; when Marvell announced that a Miss Bowater had called. I turned cold all over and held my breath.</p>
			<p>“Ah,” whispered <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, “your future <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rochester, my pet.”</p>
			<p>Every thought scuttled out of my head; my needle jerked and pricked my thumb. I gazed at the door. Never had I seen anything so untransparent. Then it opened; and⁠—there was Fanny. She was in dark gray⁠—a gown I had never seen before. A tight little hat was set demurely on her hair. In that first moment, she had not noticed me, and I could steal a long, steady look at the still, light, vigilant eyes, drinking in at one steady draught their new surroundings. Her features wore the thinnest, unfamiliar mask, like a flower seen in an artificial light. What wonder I had loved her. My hands went numb, and a sudden fatigue came over me.</p>
			<p>Then her quiet, travelling glance descended and hovered in secret colloquy with mine. She dropped me a little smiling, formal nod, moistened her lips, and composed herself for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie. And it was then I became conscious that Susan had quietly slipped out of the room.</p>
			<p>It was a peculiar experience to listen to the catechism that followed. From the absorption of her attitude, the large, sidelong head, the motionless hands, it was clear that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie found a good deal to interest her in the dark, attentive figure that stood before her. If Fanny had been Joan of Arc, she could not have had a more single-minded reception. Yet I was enjoying a duel: a duel not of wits, but of intuitions, between the sagacious, sardonic, watchful old lady, soaked in knowledge of humanity but, as far as I could discover, with extraordinarily small respect for it, and⁠—Fanny. And it seemed to me that Fanny easily held her own; just by being herself, without revealing herself. Face, figure, voice; that was all. I could not take my eyes away. If only, I thought, my own ghost would keep as quiet and hidden as that in the presence of others.</p>
			<p>Perhaps I exaggerate. Love, living or dying, even if it is not blind, cannot, I suppose, focus objects very precisely. It sees only itself or disillusionment. Whether or not, the duel was interrupted. In the full light of the window, Fanny turned softly at the opening of the door. Marvell was announcing another caller. At his name my heart leapt up like William Wordsworth’s at the rainbow. It was Sir Walter Pollacke.</p>
			<p>“This is <em>your</em> visitor, Poppet,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie waggishly assured me, “you shall have half an hour’s tête-à-tête.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
