<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-33" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie had rifled her collections for my use⁠—pygmy Venetian glass, a silver-gilt breakfast and tea service, pygmy porcelain. There were absurd little <em>mechanical</em> knickknacks⁠—piping birds, a maddening little operatic clock of which I at last managed to break the mainspring, a musical chair, and so on. My bath was of jade; my table a long one of ebony inlaid with ivory, with puffing cherub faces at each corner representing the four winds. My own few possessions, I must confess, looked not only worn but provincial by comparison. But I never surprised myself actually talking to any of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s exquisite novelties as to my other dumb, old, wooden friends. She delighted in them far more than I.</p>
			<p>I suppose, really to enjoy such pomp and luxury, one should be positively born in the purple; and then, I suppose, one must be careful that the dye does not go to the bone. Whether or not, I have long since come to the conclusion that I am vulgar by nature⁠—like my mother tongue. And at times, in spite of my relief at being free of the blackness that had craped in my last days at Beechwood, I often found myself hungering for my Bowater parlour⁠—even for its smell. Another thing I learned gradually at <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 was that I had been desperately old-fashioned; and that is, to some extent, to belong to the dead.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s chief desire, no doubt, was to give her new knickknack a suitable setting. But it may also have reminded her childlessness⁠—for she, too, like <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, was “nothing much better than an aunt”⁠—of her childhood. Of course I affected as much pleasure in it as I could, and was really grateful. But she greatly disliked being thanked for anything, and would blandly shut her eyes at the least manifestation of gratitude. “Humour me, humour me, humour me,” she once petulantly nodded at me; “there are at least a hundred prayers in the Prayer Book, my pet, to one thanksgiving, and that’s human nature all over.” It was what my frame must have <em>cost</em> that scandalized me. When, one day, after rhapsodizing (not without a shudder) over a cape and hat, which she had given me, composed solely of the shimmering emerald feathers of the hummingbird, I rather tactlessly reminded her of my £110 a year, and of my determination to live within it, her eyelids pinched me a glance as if I had explained in public that I had been bitten by a flea.</p>
			<p>Yet as time went on, a peculiar affection sprang up in me for this crowded and lonely old woman. It has survived sore trials. She was by turns generous and mean, honeyed and cantankerous, impulsive and scheming. Like <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, she disapproved of the world in general, and yet with how different a result. A restless, darting mind lay hidden behind the great mask of her countenance, with its heavy-lidded eyes and tower of hair. She loved to sit indolently peering, musing, and gossiping, twiddling the while perhaps some little antique toy in her capacious lap. I can boast, at any rate, that I was a spellbound listener, and devoured her peculiar wandering, satirical talk as if it had been manna from heaven.</p>
			<p>It was the old, old story. Talking to me was the next most private thing to talking to herself; and I think she enjoyed for a while the company of so queer a confessor. Once, I remember, she confided to me the whole story of a girlish love affair, at least forty years old. I could hardly believe my eyes as I watched her; she looked so freshened and demure and spirited. It was as if she were her own twenties just dressed up. But she had a dry and acrid tongue, and spared nothing and nobody. To her and to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater I owe nearly all my stock of worldly wisdom. And now I shall never have time, I suppose, to sort it out.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Monnerie, as Fleming confided in me one day⁠—and the aristocracy was this extremely reticent and contemptuous creature’s favourite topic of conversation⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Monnerie had been a banker, and had made a late and dazzling marriage; for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s blood was as blue as Caddis Bay on a cloudless morning. I asked Fleming if she had ever seen “Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr>,” and what kind of man he was. She never had; but remarked obscurely that he must have lived mainly on porridge, he had sown so many wild oats.</p>
			<p>This information reminded me of an old rhyme I had once learned as a child, and used to shout about the house:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Come all you young men, with your wicked ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sow your wild, wild oats in your youthful days;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we may live happy when we grow old⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy, and happy, when we grow old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day is far spent, the night’s coming on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So give us your arm, and we’ll joggle along⁠—joggle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and joggle and joggle along.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Fleming herself, I learned, had come from Ash, and was therefore, I suppose, of an Anglo-Saxon family, though she was far from stupid and rather elegant in shape. Because, I suppose, I did not like her, I was rather aggrieved she had been born in Kent. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, she told me, had had no children. The fair young man, Percy Maudlen, with the tired smile and beautiful shoes, who came to tea or luncheon at <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 at least once a week, was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s only nephew by blood; and the still fairer Susan Monnerie, who used to float into my room ever and anon like a Zephyr, was the only one <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie cared to see of her three nieces by marriage. And yet the other two, when they were invited to luncheon, were far more docile and considerate in the opinions and sentiments they expressed. <em>That</em> seemed so curious to me: there was no doubt that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie belonged to the aristocracy, and yet there always appeared to be quarrels going on in the family⁠—apart, of course, from births, deaths, and marriages, which seemed of little consequence. She enjoyed relatives in every county in England and Scotland; while I had not one, now, so far as I knew, not even in Kent.</p>
			<p>Marvell, the butler⁠—he had formerly been <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Monnerie’s valet⁠—was another familiar object of my speculations. His rather solemn, clean-shaven countenance and steady grey eyes suggested a severe critic of mankind. Yet he seemed bent only on giving pleasure and smoothing things over, and stooped my dish of sliced cherries or apricots over my shoulder with a gesture that was in itself the cream of flattery. It astonished me to hear that he had a grown-up son in India; and though I never met <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Marvell, I felt a prodigious respect for her.</p>
			<p>I would look up and see him standing so smooth and benevolent behind <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s chair that he reminded me of my bishop, and I doubt if ever she crisply uttered his delightful name but it recalled the pleasant chime of a poem which my mother had taught me: “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Nymph Complaining of the Death of Her Fawn</span>.” I should have liked to have a long talk with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marvell⁠—any time of the day when he wasn’t a butler, I mean⁠—but the opportunity never came.</p>
			<p>One day, when he had left us to ourselves, I ventured to quote a stanza of this poem to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“With sweetest milk and sugar first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I it at my own fingers nursed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as it grew, so every day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It waxed more white and sweet than they⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It had so sweet a breath! and oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I blushed to see its foot more soft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And white⁠—shall I say?⁠—than my hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, any lady’s in the land.⁠ ⁠…”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Charming, charming, Poppet,” she cooed, much amused, pushing in a nut for Chakka. “Many shades whiter than <em>your</em> wrinkled old claw, you old wretch. <em>Another</em> sagacious old bird, my dear, though past blushing, I fear, at any lady’s hand.”</p>
			<p>Nothing would content her but that I must recite my bon mot again when her nephew Percy dandled in to tea that afternoon. He sneered down on me with his pale eyes, and with finger and thumb exposed yet another inch of his silk sock, but made no comment.</p>
			<p>“Manners, my dear Percy, maketh man,” said his aunt. “Congratulate Miss <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>”</p>
			<p>If Percy Maudlen had had no manners at all, I think I should at that moment have seen the pink tip of his tongue; for if ever any human being detested my small person it was he. For very good reasons, probably, though I never troubled to inquire into them, I disliked him, too, beyond expression. He was, of course, a superior young man with a great many similar ancestors looking out of his face, yet he resembled a weasel. But Susan Monnerie⁠—the very moment I saw her I loved her; just as one loves a field of buttercups or a bush of may. For some little time she seemed to regard me as I suppose a linnet regards a young cuckoo that has been hatched out in her nest (though, of course, a squab cuckoo is of much the same size as its foster-mother). But she gradually grew accustomed to me, and even realized at last that I was something a little more⁠—and also perhaps less⁠—human than either Chakka or Cherry or a Dresden china shepherdess.</p>
			<p>I would look at her just for pleasure’s sake. Her hair was of the colour of undyed silk, with darker strands in it; her skin pale; and she had an odd little stutter in her light young voice when she was excited. I would often compare her with Fanny. What curious differences there were between them. She was graceful, but as if she had been taught to be. Unlike Fanny, she was not so fascinatingly just a beautiful body⁠—with that sometimes awful Someone looking out of its windows. There was a lovely delicacy in her, as if, absurd though it may sound, every bit of her had been selected, actually picked out, from the finest materials. Perhaps it was her food and drink that had helped to make her so; for I don’t think Miss Stebbings’s diet was more than wholesome, or that following the sea in early life makes a man rich enough to afford many dainties for his children. Anyhow, there was nothing man-made in Fanny; and if there are women-shaped mermaids I know what looks will be seen in their faces.</p>
			<p>However that may be, a keen, roving spirit dwelt in Susan’s clear, blue eyes. I never discovered in her any malice or vanity, and this, I think, frequently irritated <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie. Susan, too, used to ask me perfectly sane and ordinary questions; and I cannot describe what a flattery it was. I had always supposed that men and women were <em>intended</em> to talk openly to one another in this world; but it was an uncommonly rare luxury for me at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s. I could talk freely enough to Susan, and told her a good deal about my early days, though I kept my life at Beechwood Hill more or less to myself.</p>
			<p>And that reminds me that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater proved to have been a good prophet. It was one day at luncheon. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie happened to cast a glance at the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Morning Post</i> newspaper which lay open on a chair near by, showing in tall type at the top of the column, “Sudden Death of Sir Jasper Goodge.” Sir Jasper Goodge, whose family history, it seemed, was an open book to her, reminded her whimsically of another tragedy. She put back her head and, surveying me blandly as I sat up beside her, inquired if I had known at all intimately that unfortunate young man, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble.</p>
			<p>“I remember him bobbing and sidling at me that delightful afternoon when⁠—what do you think of it, Susan?⁠—Poppet and I discovered in each other an unfashionable taste for the truth! A bazaar in aid of the Pollacke Blanket Fund, or something of the kind.”</p>
			<p>The recollection seemed to have amused her so much that for the moment I held my breath and ignored her question.</p>
			<p>“But why was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble unfortunate?” inquired Susan, attempting to make Cherry beg for a breadcrumb. I glanced in consternation at Marvell, who at the moment was bringing the coffee things into the room. But he appeared to be uninterested in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble was unfortunate, my dear,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie complacently, “because he cut his throat.”</p>
			<p>“Ach! how horrible. How can you say such things! Get down, you little silly! Please, Aunt Alice, there must be something pleasanter to talk about than that? Everybody knows about the hideous old Sir Jasper Goodge; so it doesn’t much matter what one says of him. But.⁠ ⁠…” In spite of her command the little dog still gloated on her fingers.</p>
			<p>“There may be things pleasanter, my dear Susan,” returned <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie complacently, “but there are few so illuminating. In Greek tragedy, I used to be told, all such horrors have the effect of what is called a purgation. Did <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble <em>seem</em> that kind of young man, my dear? And why was he so impetuous?”</p>
			<p>“I think, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie,” said I, “he was in trouble.”</p>
			<p>“H’m,” said she. “He had a very sallow look, I remember. So he discussed his troubles? But not with <em>you</em>, my fairy?”</p>
			<p>“Surely, Aunt Alice,” exclaimed Susan hotly, “it isn’t quite fair or nice to bring back such ghastly memories. Why,” she touched my hand with the tips of her light fingers, “she is quite cold already.”</p>
			<p>“Poppet’s hands are always cold,” replied her aunt imperturbably. “And I suspect that she and I know more about this wicked world than has brought shadows to your young brow. We’ll return to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble, my dear, when Susan is butterflying elsewhere. She is so shockingly easily shocked.”</p>
			<p>But it was Susan herself who returned to the subject. She came into my room where I sat reading⁠—a collection of the tiniest little books in the most sumptuous gilt morocco had been yet another of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s kindnesses⁠—and she stood for a moment musing out through my silk window blinds at the vast zinc tank on the roof.</p>
			<p>“Was that true?” she said at last. “Did you really know someone who killed himself? Who was he? What was he like?”</p>
			<p>“He was a young man⁠—in his twenty-ninth year,” I replied automatically, “dark, short, with gold spectacles, a clergyman. He was the curate at <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s⁠—Beechwood, you know.” I was speaking in a low voice, as if I might be overheard.</p>
			<p>It was extraordinary how swiftly <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble had faded into a vanishing shadow. From the very instant of his death the world had begun to adjust itself to his absence. And now nothing but a memory⁠—a black, sad memory.</p>
			<p>But Susan’s voice interrupted these faint musings. “A clergyman!” she was repeating. “But why⁠—why did he⁠—do that?”</p>
			<p>“They said, melancholia. I suppose it was just impossible⁠—or <em>seemed</em> impossible⁠—for him to go on living.”</p>
			<p>“But what made him melancholy? How awful. And how can Aunt Alice have said it like that?”</p>
			<p>“But surely,” argued I, in my old contradictory fashion, and spying about for a path of evasion, “it’s better to call things by their proper names. What is the body, after all? Not that I mean one has any right to⁠—to <em>not</em> die in one’s own bed.”</p>
			<p>“And do you really think like that?⁠—the body of no importance? You? Why, Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>, Aunt Alice calls you her ‘pocket Venus,’ and she means it, too, in her own sly way.”</p>
			<p>“It’s very kind of her,” said I, breathing more freely. “Someone I know always calls me Midgetina, or Miss Midge, anything of that sort. I don’t mean, Miss Monnerie, that it doesn’t <em>matter</em> what we are called. Why, if that were so, there wouldn’t be any Society at all, would there? We should all be⁠—well⁠—anonymous.” Deep inside I felt myself smile. “Not that that makes much difference to good poetry.”</p>
			<p>Susan sighed. “How zigzaggedly you talk. What has poetry to do with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble?⁠—that was his name, wasn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“Well, it hasn’t very much,” I confessed. “He hadn’t the time for it.”</p>
			<p>Susan seated herself on a cushion on the floor⁠—and with how sharp a stab reminded me of Fanny and the old, carefree days of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wuthering Heights</i>.</p>
			<p>Surely⁠—in spite of Fanny⁠—life had definitely taken a tinge of Miss Brontë’s imagination since then. But it was only the languor of Susan’s movements, and that because she seemed a little tired, rather than merely indolent. And if from Fanny’s eyes had now stooped a serpent and now a blinded angel; from these clear blue ones looked only a human being like myself. Even as I write that “like myself,” I ponder. But let it stay.</p>
			<p>“So you really did know him?” Susan persisted. “And it doesn’t seem a nightmare even to think of him? And who, I say, made it impossible for him to go on living?” So intense was her absorption in these questions that when they ceased her hands tightened round her knees, and her small mouth remained ajar.</p>
			<p>“You said ‘<em>what</em>’ just now,” I prevaricated, looking up at her.</p>
			<p>At this her blue eyes opened so wide I broke into a little laugh.</p>
			<p>“No, no, no, Miss Monnerie,” I hastened to explain, “not <em>me</em>. It isn’t my story, though I was in it⁠—and to blame. But please, if you would be so kind, don’t mention it again to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, and don’t think about it any more.”</p>
			<p>“Not think about it! <em>You</em> must. Besides, thoughts sometimes think themselves. I always supposed that things like that only happened to quite⁠—to different people, you know. Was <em>he</em>?”</p>
			<p>“<em>Different?</em>” I couldn’t follow her. “He was the curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s⁠—a friend of the Pollackes.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, the Pollackes,” said she; and having glanced at me again, said no more.</p>
			<p>The smallest confidence, I find, is a shortcut to friendship. And after this little conversation there was no ice to break between Susan Monnerie and myself, and she often championed me in my little difficulties⁠—even if only by her silence.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
