<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-7" id="chapter-52" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</h3>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie had paid for elbow room. It was the last “Private View” in this world we were to share together. The sight of her capacious figure with its great bonnet and the broad, dark face beneath, now suddenly become strange and hostile, filled me with a vague sense of desolation. Yet I know she has forgiven me. Had I not pocketed my “pretty little fastidiousness”?</p>
			<p>What Fanny had planned to do if Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>, plain and simple, had occupied the Signorina’s table I cannot even guess. For the spectacle of the squat, black, gloating guy she actually found there, she was utterly unprepared. It seemed, as I looked at her, that myself had fainted⁠—had withdrawn out of my body⁠—like the spirit in sleep. Or, maybe, not to be too nice about it, I merely “became” my disguise. With mind emptied of every thought, I sank into an almost lifeless stagnancy, and with a heavy settled stare out of my black and yellow, from under the coarse fringe that brushed my brows, I met her eyes. Out of time and place, in a lightless, vacant solitude, we wrestled for mastery. At length the sneering, incredulous smile slowly faded from the pale, lovely face, leaving it twisted up as if after a nauseous draught of physic. Her gaze faltered, and fell. Her bosom rose; she coughed and turned away.</p>
			<p>“Hideous! monstrous!” murmured <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie to the tall, expressionless figure that stood beside her. “The abject evil of the creature!”</p>
			<p>Her dark, appraising glance travelled over me⁠—feet, hands, body, lace-draped head. It swept across my eyes as if they were less significant than bits of china stuck in a coconut.</p>
			<p>“No, Miss Bowater,” she turned massively round on her, “you were perfectly right, it seems. As usual⁠—but a dangerous habit, my dear. My little ransoming scheme must wait a bit. Just as well, perhaps, that our patient’s dainty nerves should have been spared this particular little initiation⁠—. Could one have imagined it?”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Padgwick-Steggall merely raised his eyebrows. “I shouldn’t have cared to try,” he drawled. And the lady beside him made a little mouth and laid her gloved hand on his arm.</p>
			<p>“But, Madame is forgetting,” whined the Signorina in a broken nosy English over her outspread fan, “Madame is forgetting. It’s alive! Oh, truly!” and I clasped my arms even tighter across my padded chest, my body involuntarily rocking to and fro, though not with amusement.</p>
			<p>“Madame is forgetting nothing of the kind,” retorted <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie heartily. “The princess is an angel⁠—Angélique⁠—adorable.” She turned to the gipsy woman and slipped a coin into the clawlike fingers. “Well, good night,” she nodded at me. “We are perfectly satisfied.”</p>
			<p>“La, la, Madame,” my stuttering voice called after her, the words leaping out from some old hiding-place in my mind. “<i xml:lang="fr">Je vous remercie, madame. Rien ne va plus.⁠ ⁠… Noir gagne!</i>”</p>
			<p>Her ebony stick shook beneath her hand. “Unspeakable,” she angrily ejaculated, stumping her way out. “A positive outrage against humanity.”</p>
			<p>I shut my eyes, but the silent laughter that had once overtaken me in my bedroom at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s scarcely sounded in my head. And <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie could more easily survive the little exchange than I. My body was dull and aching as if after a severe fall. The booth was filling for the last time.</p>
			<p>Little life was left in the inert figure that faced this new assortment of her fellow-creatures: how strangely dissimilar one from another; how horrifyingly alike. A faint premonition bade me be on my guard. Under the wavering flame of the lamp, my glance moved slowly on from face to face, eye on to eye; and behind everyone a watcher whom now I dared not wait to challenge. Empty or cynical, disgusted, malevolent, or blankly curious, they met me: none pitiful; none saddened or afflicted. On former nights⁠—Why had they grown so hostile? This, then, was to smother in the bog.</p>
			<p>But one face there was known to me, and that known well. Hoping, perhaps, to take me unaware, or may it have been to snatch a secret word with me; Fanny had slipped back into the tent again, and was now steadily regarding me from behind the throng. A throng so densely packed together that the canvas walls bulged behind them, and the tent-pole bent beneath the strain. Yet so much alone were she and I in that last infinite moment that we might have been whispering together after death. And this time, suddenly overwhelmed with self-loathing, it was I who turned away.</p>
			<p>When, stretching my cramped limbs, I drew back, exhausted and shivering, from the empty tent, I thought for an instant that the figure which sat crouching in the corner of the recess was asleep. But no: with head averted, sweat gleaming on his forehead, he rose to his feet. His consciousness had been my theatre in a degree past even my realization.</p>
			<p>“Then, that is over,” was all he said. “Now it is my turn.”</p>
			<p>The voice was flat and indifferent, but he could not conceal his disgust of what had passed, nor his dread of what was to come. Why, I thought angrily once more as I looked at him, why did he exaggerate things like this? Even a drowning man can sink three times, and still cheat the water. What cared I?⁠—the night was nearly over. We should have won release. Why consider it so deeply? But even while I pleaded with him to let me finish the wretched business⁠—every savour of adventure and daring and romance gone from it now⁠—I was conscious of the trussed-up monstrosity that confronted him. He could not endure even a glance at my painted face. I stepped back from him with a hidden grimace. Past even praying for, then. So be it.</p>
			<p>I heard the nimble stepping of the pony’s hoofs on the worn turf. A sullen malice smouldered in its reddish, luminous eyes. When I clutched at its bridle it jerked back its sensitive head as if teased with a gadfly. The gipsy daubed vermilion on my friend’s sallow cheeks. She shook out the tarnished finery she had brought with her and hung it round the stooping shoulders. She plastered down his black hair above his eyes, and thrust a riding-whip into his hand.</p>
			<p>“There, my fine pretty gentleman,” she smirked at him. “King of the Carrots! I lay even your own mammie wouldn’t know you now, not even if you tried it straddle-legs. Tug at the knot, lovey; it’s fast, but it won’t strangle you. As for you, you⁠—!” she suddenly flamed at me, “all very fly and cunning, but if I’d had the fixing of it, you wouldn’t have diddled me: not you. I know <em>your</em> shop. Slick off double quick, I warn you, or you’ll have the mob at your heels. Now then, master!”</p>
			<p>She grasped at the bridle, slapped the tooth-bared sensitive muzzle with her hand. I drew back, cowed and speechless. The sour thought died in my mind⁠—Better, perhaps, if we had missed each other on the road. The pony jerked and snatched back its head.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>He was gone, and now I was quite alone. What was there to fear? Only his contempt, his loathing of this last humiliation? But that, too, would soon be nothing but a memory. As always, the present would glide into the past. Yet a dreadful foreboding daunted me. Coarse canvas, walls and roof, table, beaten grass, my very hands and clothes had become menacing and unreal. The lamp hissed and bubbled as if at any moment it would burst asunder. Alone, afraid, ashamed, in the foulness of the tent, I looked around me in the silence; and beyond, above⁠—the Universe of night and space. All my life but the feeble rustlings of a mouse in straw.</p>
			<p>As I stripped off my miserable gewgaws I discovered myself talking into my solitude; weeping, beseeching, though eyes were dry and tongue silent. I scoured away the chalk and paint: and cleansed as far as possible my travel-stained clothes. From my bit of looking-glass a scared and shining face looked out. “Oh, my dear,” I whispered, but not to its reflection, “it is as clean now and forever as I can make it.” I tied up my bundle.</p>
			<p>It was impossible to cheat away the moments any longer. I sat down and listened. A distant roar of welcome, like that of a wave breaking over a wreck, had been borne across as the band broke into its welcoming tune. I saw the ring, its tall, lank-cheeked “master” in his white shirt and coattails, the lights, the sidling, squalling clown, and the slim, exquisite creature with its ungainly rider ambling on and on. Where sat Fanny amidst that rabble? What were her thoughts? Was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie already yawning over the low, beggarly scene? A few minutes now. I began to count. A scream, human or animal, rose faint and awful in the distance, and died away.</p>
			<p>I climbed down the ladder and looked out of the tent. Far-spread the fields and wooded hills lay, as if in a swoon beneath the blazing moonlight. The scattered lamps on the slope shone dim as glowworms. Only a few figures loitered in the gleam of the sideshows, and so engrossed and still sat the watching multitude beneath the enormous mushroom of the tent, so thinly floated out its strains of music, that the hollow clucking of the stream over its pebbles beneath the wan-stoned bridge was audible. A few isolated stars glittered faintly in the heights of the sky. What was happening now? Why did he not hasten? I was ready: my life prepared. I could bear no more waiting. A whip cracked. The music ceased: silence. One moment now.</p>
			<p>Again the whip cracked. And then, as if at a signal, a vast, protracted, unanimous bawl poured up into space, a spout of sound, like a gigantic, invisible flower. “That wasn’t applause. But, you know, that wasn’t applause,” I heard myself muttering. There can be no mistaking the sound of human mockery. There can be no mistaking that brutal wrench at the heart, under one’s very ribs. I leapt round where I stood, in a kind of giddiness.</p>
			<p>The shout died away. An indiscriminate clamour broke out⁠—clapping of hands, beating of feet, whistling, hootings, booings, catcalls, and these all but drowned by cymbal, drum, trombone: “Goodbye, Sweetheart, Goodbye.” It was over. Unlike <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, the mob was imperfectly satisfied. But all was well. The elephant, massive, imperturbable⁠—the sagacious elephant with the hurdy-gurdy, must now be swinging into the ring.</p>
			<p>I ran out over the trampled grass to meet the approaching group⁠—showman, gipsy, trembling, sweating pony. Its rider stooped forward on the saddle, clutching its pommel, as if afraid of falling. He pushed himself off, lurched unsteadily, lifted and let fall his arm in an attempt to stroke the milk-white snapping muzzle. The strings of his cloak were already broken. He edged from beneath it, and with his left hand clumsily brushed the dust and damp from his face.</p>
			<p>“He hadn’t quite the knack of it,” the showman was explaining. “Stirrup a morsel too short, maybe. All the strength, lady, and the ginger, by God, but not the knack, you understand. And we offered him a quieter little animal too. But what I say is, a bargain’s a bargain, that’s what I say. A bit dazed-like, sir, eh? My, you did come a cropper.”</p>
			<p>“Sst! are you hurt?” I whispered.</p>
			<p>The head shook; his moon-washed face smiled at me.</p>
			<p>“Come now, come <em>now</em>,” I implored him, tugging at his arm, “before the crowd.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He recoiled as if my touch had scalded him.</p>
			<p>“We go⁠—” I turned to the showman.</p>
			<p>Hands thrust under his leathern belt, he looked fixedly at me, and then at the woman. Her eyes glittered glassily back at him.</p>
			<p>“That’s it. The young lady knows best. He’s twisted his shoulder, lady; wrenched it; more weight than size, as you might say. She’ll know where to make her friend comfortable. Trust the ladies. Never you be afraid of that. Now, then, Mary, fetch up the gentleman’s cart.”</p>
			<p>The woman, with one wolfish glance into his face, obeyed.</p>
			<p>“There, sir! Is that easier? Push the rags in there behind his back. It’ll save the jolts. Lord love you, I wouldn’t split on the pair of you, not me. I know the old, old story. There, that’s it! Now, then, your ladyship. No more weight in the hand than a mushroom! All serene, Mary. Home sweet home; that’s the tune, sir, ain’t it? Drive easy now: and off we go.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
