<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-42" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
			<p>Susan’s visits to her aunt were now less frequent. Percy’s multiplied. Duty seemed to have become a pleasure to him. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s gaze would rest on him with a drowsy vigilance which it was almost impossible to distinguish from mere vacancy of mind. He was fortunate in being her only nephew; unfortunate in being himself, and the son of a sister to whom <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie seemed very little attached. Still, he appeared to be doing his best to cultivate his aunt’s graces, would meander “in attendance” round and round the Square’s square garden, while Fanny’s arm had now almost supplanted <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s ebony cane. When <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie was too much fatigued for this mild exercise, or otherwise engaged, there was still my health to consider. At least Fanny seemed to think so. But since Percy’s conversation had small attractions for me, it was far rather he who enjoyed the experience; while I sat and stared at nothing under a tree.</p>
			<p>At less than nothing⁠—for I was staring, as usual, chiefly at myself. I seemed to have lost the secret of daydreaming. And if the quantity of aversion that looked out of my eyes had matched its quality, those piebald plane-trees and poisonous laburnums would have been scorched as if with fire. I shall never forget those interminable August days, besieged by the roar and glare and soot and splendour and stare of London. All but friendless, absolutely penniless, I had nothing but bits of clothes for bribes to keep Fleming from mutiny. I shrank from making her an open enemy; though I knew, as time went on, that she disrelished me more and more. She would even keep her nose averted from my clothes.</p>
			<p>As for Fanny, to judge from her animation when Susan and Captain Valentine broke in upon us, I doubt if anybody less complacent than Percy would not have realized that she was often bored. She would look at him with head on one side, as if she had been painted like that forever and ever in a picture. She could idly hide behind her beauty, and Percy might as well have gone hunting Echo or a rainbow. She could make corrosive remarks in so seducing a voice that the poor creature hardly knew where the smart came from. He would exclaim, “Oh, I say, Miss Bowater!” and gape like a goldfish. Solely, perhaps, to have someone to discuss herself with, Fanny so far forgave and forgot my shortcomings as to pay me an occasional visit, and had yawned how hideously expensive she found it to live with the rich. But the only promise of help I could make was beyond any possibility of performance. I promised, none the less, for my one dread was that she should guess what straits I was in for money.</p>
			<p>It is all very well to accuse Percy Maudlen of goldfishiness. What kind of fish was I? During the few months of my life at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s⁠—until, that is, Fanny’s arrival⁠—she had transported her “Queen Bee,” as she sometimes called me, to every conceivable social function and ceremony, except a deathbed and a funeral. Why had I not played my cards a little more skilfully? Had not Messrs de la Rue designed a pack as if expressly for me, and for my own particular little game of Patience? If perhaps I had shown more sense and less sensibility; and had not been, as I suppose, in spite of all my airs and flauntings, such an inward young woman, what altitudes I might have scaled. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, indeed, had once made me a promise to present me at Court in the coming May. It is true that this was a distinction that had been enjoyed by many of my predecessors in my own particular “line”⁠—but I don’t think my patroness would have dished me up in a Pie.</p>
			<p>That being so, my proud bosom might at this very moment be heaving beneath a locket adorned with the royal monogram in seed pearls, and inscribed, “To the Least of her Subjects from the Greatest of Queens.” Why, I might have been the most talked-of and photographed débutante of the season. But I must beware of sour grapes. “There was once a Diogenes whom the gods shut up in a tub.”⁠—Poor <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wagginhorne, he had been, after all, comparatively frugal with his azaleas.</p>
			<p>In all seriousness I profited far too little by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s generosities, by my “chances,” while I was with her. I just grew hostile, and so half-blind. Many of her friends, of course, were merely wealthy or fashionable, but others were just natural human beings. As Fanny had discovered, she not only delighted in people that were pleasant to look at. She enjoyed also what, I suppose, is almost as rare, intelligence.</p>
			<p>The society “Beauties,” now? To be quite candid, and I hope without the least tinge of jealousy, I think they liked the look of me⁠—well, no better than I liked the look of excessively handsome men. These exotics of either sex reminded me of petunias⁠—the headachy kind, that are neither red nor blue, but a mixture. I always felt when I looked at them that they knew they were making me dizzy. Yet, as a matter of fact, I could hardly see their beauty for their clothes. It must, of course, be extremely difficult to endure <em>pure</em> admiration. True, I never remember even the most tactful person examining me for the first time without showing some little symptom of discomposure. But that’s a very different thing.</p>
			<p>There was, however, another kind of beauty which I loved with all my heart. It is difficult to express what I mean, but to see a woman whose face seemed to be the picture of a dream of herself, or a man whose face was absolutely the showing of his own mind⁠—I never wearied of that. Or, at any rate, I do not now; in looking back.</p>
			<p>So much for outsides. Humanity, our old cook, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ballard, used to say, is very like a veal and ham pie: its least digestible part is usually the crust. I am only an amateur veal and ham Pieist; and the fact remains that I experienced just as much difficulty with what are called “clever” people. They were like Adam Waggett in his Sunday clothes⁠—a little too much of something to be quite all there. I firmly believe that what one means is the best thing to say, and the very last thing, however unaffected, most of these clever people said was seemingly what they meant. Their conversation rarely had more than an intellectual interest. You asked for a penny, and they gave you what only looked like a threepenny bit.</p>
			<p>Perhaps this is nothing but prejudice, but I have certainly always got on very much better with stupid people. Chiefly, perhaps, because I could share experiences with them; and the latest thoughts did not matter so much. Clever men’s⁠—and women’s⁠—experiences all seem to be in their heads; and when I have seen a rich man clamber through the eye of a needle, as poor <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble used to say, I shall keep my eyes open for a clever one attempting the same feat. It had been one of my absurd little amusements at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s to imagine myself in strange places⁠—keeping company with a dishevelled Comet in the cold wilds of space, or walking about in the furnaces of the Sun, like Shadrach and Abednego. Not so now. Yet if I had had the patience, and the far better sense, to fix my attention on anyone I disliked at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s so as to enter <em>in</em>; no doubt I should so much have enlarged my inward self as to make it a match at last even for poor <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Daniel Lambert.</p>
			<p>On the other hand, I sometimes met people at <abbr>No.</abbr> 2, or when I was taken out by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, whose faces looked as if they had been on an almost unbelievably long journey⁠—and one not merely through this world, though that helps. I did try to explore <em>those</em> eyes, and mouths, and wrinkles; and solitudes, stranger than any comet’s, I would find myself in at times. Alas, they paid me extremely little attention; though I wonder they did not see in my eyes how hungry I was for it. They were as mysterious as what is called genius. And what would I not give to have set eyes on Sir Isaac Newton, or Nelson, or John Keats⁠—all three of them comparatively little men.</p>
			<p>However absurdly pranked up with conceit I might be, I knew in my heart that outwardly, at any rate, I was nothing much better than a curio. To care for me was therefore a really difficult feat. And apart from there being very little time for anything at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s, I never caught anyone making the attempt. When the novelty of me had worn off, I used to amuse myself by listening to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s friends talking to one another⁠—discussing plays and pictures and music and so on⁠—anything that was new, and, of course, each other. Often on these occasions I hardly knew whether I was on my head or my heels.</p>
			<p>Books had always been to me just a part of my life; and music very nearly my death. However much I forgot of it, I wove what I could remember of my small reading round myself, so to speak; and I am sure it made the cocoon more comfortable. As often as not these talkers argued about books as if their authors had made them⁠—certainly not “out of their power and love”⁠—but merely for their readers to pick to pieces; and about “beauty,” too, as if it were something you could eat with a spoon. As for poetry, one might have guessed from what they said that it meant no more than⁠—well, its “meaning.” As if a butterfly were a chrysalis. I have sometimes all but laughed out. It was so contrary to my own little old-fashioned notions. Certainly it was not my mother’s way.</p>
			<p>But there, what presumption this all is. I had never been to school, never been out of Kent, had never “done” anything, nor “been” anything, except⁠—and that half-heartedly⁠—myself. No wonder I was censorious.</p>
			<p>If I could have foreseen how interminably difficult a task it would prove to tack these memoirs together, I am sure I should have profited a little more by the roarings of my fellow lions. As a matter of fact I used merely to watch them sipping their tea, and devouring their cake amid a languishing circle of admirers, and to wonder if they found the cage as tedious as I did. If they noticed me at all, they were usually polite enough; but⁠—like the Beauties⁠—inclined to be absent and restless in my company. So the odds were against me. I had one advantage over them, however, for when I was no longer a novelty, I could occasionally slip in, unperceived, behind an immense marquetry bureau. There in the dust I could sit at peace, comparing its back with its front, and could enjoy at leisure the conversation beyond.</p>
			<p>Nevertheless, there was one old gentleman, with whom I really made friends. He was a bachelor, and was not only the author of numbers of books, but when he was a little boy had been presented by Charles Dickens himself with a copy of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">David Copperfield</i>, and had actually sat on the young novelist’s knee. No matter who it was he might be talking to, he used to snap his fingers at me in the most exciting fashion whenever we saw each other in the distance, and we often shared a quiet little talk together (I standing on a highish chair, perhaps, and he squatting beside me, his hands on his knees) in some corner of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s enormous drawing-room, well out of the mob.</p>
			<p>I once ventured to ask him how to write.</p>
			<p>His face grew very solemn. “Lord have mercy upon me,” he said, “<em>to write</em>, my dear young lady. Well, there is only one recipe I have ever heard of: Take a quart or more of lifeblood; mix it with a bottle of ink, and a teaspoonful of tears; and ask God to forgive the blots.” Then he laughed at me, and polished his eyeglasses with his silk pocket handkerchief.</p>
			<p>I surveyed this grisly mixture without flinching, and laughed too, and said, tapping his arm with my fan: “But, dear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> ⸺, would you have me die of anæmia?”</p>
			<p>And he said I was a dear, valuable creature, and, when next “Black Pudding Day” tempted us, we would collaborate.</p>
			<p>Having heard <em>his</em> views, I was tempted to push on, and inquired as flatteringly as possible of a young portrait painter how he mixed his paints: “So as to get exactly the colours you want, you know?”</p>
			<p>He gently rubbed one long-fingered hand over the other until there fell a lull in the conversation around us. “What I mix my paints with, Miss <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>? Why⁠—merely with brains,” he replied. My old novelist had forgotten the brains. But I discovered in some book or other long afterwards that a still more celebrated artist had said that too; so I suppose the <i xml:lang="fr">mot</i> is traditional.</p>
			<p>And last, how to “act”: for some mysterious reason I never asked any theatrical celebrity, male or female, how to do that?</p>
			<p>More or less intelligent questions, I am afraid, are not the only shortcut to good, or even to polite, conversation. And I was such a dunce that I never really learned what topics are respectable, and whatnot. In consequence, I often amused <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s friends without knowing why. They would exchange a kind of little ogling glance, or with a silvery peal of laughter like bells, cry, “How naive!”</p>
			<p>How I detested the word. Naive⁠—it was simply my ill-bred earnestness. Still, I made one valuable discovery: that you could safely laugh or even titter at things which it was extremely bad manners to be serious about. What you <em>could</em> be serious about, without letting skeletons out of the cupboard⁠—that was the riddle. I had been brought up too privately ever to be able to answer it.</p>
			<p>How engrossing it all would have been if only the Harrises could have trebled my income, and if Fanny had not known me so well. There was even a joy in the ladies who shook their lorgnettes at me as if I were deaf, or looked at me with their noses, as one might say, as if I were a bad or unsavoury joke. On my part, I could never succeed in forgetting that, in spite of appearances, they must be of flesh and blood, and therefore the prey of them, and of the World, and the Devil. So I used to amuse myself by imagining how they would look in their bones, or in rags, or in heaven, or as when they were children. Or again, by an effort of fancy I would reduce them, clothes and all, to <em>my</em> proportions; or even a little less. And though these little inward exercises made me absentminded, it made them ever so much more interesting and entertaining.</p>
			<p>How I managed not to expire in what, for a country mouse, was extremely like living in a bottle of champagne, I don’t know. And if my silly little preferences suggest cynicism⁠—well, I may be smug enough, but I don’t, and won’t, believe I am a cynic. Remember I was young. Besides I love human beings, especially when they are very human, and I have even tried to forgive Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> her Miss M-ishness. How can I be a cynic if I have tried to do that? It is a far more difficult task than to make allowances for the poor, wretched, immortal waxwork creatures in Madame Tussaud’s Chamber of Horrors, or even for the gentleman naturalist who shot and stuffed Kent’s last golden oriole.</p>
			<p>Nor have I ever, for more than a moment, shared with Lemuel Gulliver his none too nice disgust at the people of Brobdingnag, even at kindhearted Glumdalclitch. Am I not myself⁠—not one of the quarrelsome “Fair Folks of the Woods”⁠—but a Yahoo? Gulliver, of course, was purposely made unaccustomed to the gigantic; while I was born and bred, though not to such an extreme, in its midst. And habit is second nature, or, as an old Lyndsey proverb goes, “There’s nowt like eels for eeliness.”</p>
			<p>I am, none the less, ever so thankful that neither my ears, nose, nor eyes, positively magnify, so to speak. I may be a little more sensitive to noises and smells than some people are, but that again is probably only because I was brought up so fresh and quiet and privately. I am far more backward than can be excused, and in some things abominably slow-witted. Whether or not my feelings are pretty much of the usual size, I cannot say. What is more to the point is that in some of my happiest moments my inward self seems to be as remote from my body as the Moon is from Greenland; and, at others⁠—even though that body weighs me down to the earth like a stone⁠—it is as if memory and consciousness stretched away into the ages, far, far beyond my green and dwindling Barrow on Chizzel Hill, and had shaken to the solitary night-cry of Creation, “Let there be Light.”</p>
			<p>But enough and to spare of all this egotism. I must get back to my story.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
