<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
			<p>When my eyes opened next morning, a strange, still glare lay over the ceiling, and I looked out of my window on a world mantled and cold with snow. For a while I forgot the fever of the last few days in watching the birds hopping and twittering among the crumbs that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater scattered out on the windowsill for my pleasure. And yet⁠—their every virtue, every grace, Fanny Bowater, all were thine! The very snow, in my girlish fantasy, was the fairness beneath which the unknown Self in her must, as I fondly believed, lie slumbering; a beauty that hid also from me for a while the restless, self-centred mind. How believe that such beauty is any the less a gift to its possessor than its bespeckled breast and song to a thrush, its sheen to a starling? It is a riddle that still baffles me. If we are all shut up in our bodies as the poets and the Scriptures say we are, then how is it that many of the loveliest seem to be all but uninhabited, or to harbour such dingy tenants; while quite plain faces may throng with animated ghosts?</p>
			<p>Fanny did not come to share my delight in the snow that morning. And as I looked out on it, waiting on in vain, hope flagged, and a sadness stole over its beauty. Probably she had not given the fantastic lodger a thought. She slid through life, it seemed, as easily as a seal through water. But I was not the only friend who survived her caprices. In spite of her warning about the dish-washing, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble came to see her that afternoon. She was out. With a little bundle of papers in his hand he paused at the gate-post to push his spectacles more firmly on to his nose and cast a kind of homeless look over the fields before turning his face towards <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s. Next day, Holy Innocents’, he came again; but this time with more determination, for he asked to see me.</p>
			<p>To rid myself, as far as possible, of one piece of duplicity, I at once took the bull by the horns, and in the presence of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater boldly invited him to stay to tea. With a flurried glance of the eye in her direction he accepted my invitation.</p>
			<p>“A cold afternoon, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater,” he intoned. “The cup that cheers, the cup that cheers.”</p>
			<p>My landlady left the conventions to take care of themselves; and presently he and I found ourselves positively <i>tête-à-tête</i> over her seed cake and thin bread and butter.</p>
			<p>But though we both set to work to make conversation, an absent intentness in his manner, a listening turn of his head, hinted that his thoughts were not wholly with me.</p>
			<p>“Are you long with us?” he inquired, stirring his tea.</p>
			<p>“I am quite, quite happy here,” I replied, with a sigh.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” he replied, a little wistfully, taking a sip, “how few of us have the courage to confess that. Perhaps it flatters us to suppose we are miserable. It is this pessimism⁠—of a mechanical, a scientific age⁠—which we have chiefly to contend against. We don’t often see you at <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s, I think?”</p>
			<p>“You wouldn’t see <i>very</i> much of me, if I did come,” I replied a little tartly. Possibly it was his “we” that had fretted me. It seemed needlessly egotistical. “On the other hand,” I added, “wouldn’t there be a risk of the congregation seeing nothing else?”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble opened his mouth and laughed. “I wish,” he said, with a gallant little bow, “there were more like you.”</p>
			<p>“More like <i>me</i>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble?”</p>
			<p>“I mean,” he explained, darting a glance at the furniture of my bedroom, whose curtains, to my annoyance, hung withdrawn, “I mean that⁠—that you⁠—that so many of us refuse to see the facts of life. To look them in the face, Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name" class="eoc">M.</abbr> There is nothing to fear.”</p>
			<p>We were getting along famously, and I begged him to take some of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s black currant jam.</p>
			<p>“But then, I have plenty of time,” I said agreeably. “And the real difficulty is to get the facts to face me. Dear me, if only, now, I had some of Miss Bowater’s brains.”</p>
			<p>A veil seemed suddenly to lift from his face and as suddenly to descend again. So, too, he had for a moment stopped eating, then as suddenly begun eating again.</p>
			<p>“Ah, Miss Bowater! She is indeed clever; a⁠—a brilliant young lady. The very life of a party, I assure you. And, yet, do you know, in parochial gatherings, try as I may, I occasionally find it very difficult to get people to mix. The little social formulas, the prejudices. Yet, surely, Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>, religion <i>should</i> be the great solvent. At least, that is my view.”</p>
			<p>He munched away more vigorously, and gazed through his spectacles out through my window-blinds.</p>
			<p>“Mixing people must be very wearisome,” I suggested, examining his face.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Wearisome,’ ” he repeated blandly. “I am sometimes at my wits’ end. No. A curate’s life is not a happy one.” Yet he confessed it almost with joy.</p>
			<p>“And the visiting!” I said. And then, alas! my tongue began to run away with me. He was falling back again into what I may call his company voice, and I pined to talk to the real <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble, little dreaming how soon that want was to be satiated.</p>
			<p>“I sometimes wonder, do you know, if religion is made difficult enough.”</p>
			<p>“But I assure you,” he replied, politely but firmly, “a true religion is exceedingly difficult. ‘The eye of a needle’⁠—we mustn’t forget that.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, yes,” said I warmly; “that ‘eye’ will be narrow enough even for a person with my little advantages. I remember my mother’s cook telling me, when I was a child, that in the old days, really wicked people if they wanted to return to the Church, had to do so in a sheet, with ashes on their heads, you know, and carrying a long lighted candle. She said that if the door was shut against them, they died in torment, and went to Hell. But she was a Roman Catholic, like my grandmother.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble peered at me as if over a wall.</p>
			<p>“I remember, too,” I went on, “one summer’s day as a very little girl I was taken to the evening service. And the singing⁠—bursting out like that, you know, with the panting and the yowling of the organ, made me faint and sick; and I jumped right out of the window.”</p>
			<p>“Jumped out of the window!” cried my visitor in consternation.</p>
			<p>“Yes, we were at the back. Pollie, my nursemaid, had put me up in the niche, you see; and I dragged her hand away. But I didn’t hurt myself. The grass was thick in the churchyard; I fell light, and I had plenty of clothes on. I rather enjoyed it⁠—the air and the tombstones. And though I had my gasps, the ‘eye’ seemed big enough when I was a child. But afterwards⁠—when I was confirmed⁠—I thought of Hell a good deal. I can’t <i>see</i> it so plainly now. Wide, low, and black, with a few demons. <i>That</i> can’t be right.”</p>
			<p>“My dear young lady!” cried <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble, as if shocked, “is it wise to attempt it? It must be admitted, of course, that if we do not take advantage of the benefits bestowed upon us by Providence in a Christian community, we cannot escape His displeasure. The absence from His Love.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I said, looking at him in sudden intimacy, “I believe that.” And I pondered a while, following up my own thoughts. “Have you ever read <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clodd’s <i>Childhood of the World</i>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble?”</p>
			<p>By the momentary confusion of his face I gathered that he had not. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clodd?⁠ ⁠… Ah, yes, the writer on Primitive Man.”</p>
			<p>“This was only a little book, for the young, you know. But in it <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clodd says, I remember, that even the most shocking old forms of religion were not invented by devils. They were ‘Man’s struggles from darkness to twilight.’ What he meant was that no man <i>loves</i> darkness. At least,” I added, with a sudden gush of remembrances, “not without the stars.”</p>
			<p>“That is exceedingly true,” replied <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble. “And, talking of stars, what a wonderful sight it was the night before last, the whole heavens one spangle of diamonds! I was returning from visiting a sick parishioner, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hubbins.” Then it was <i>his</i> foot that Fanny and I had heard reverberating on the hill! I hastily hid my face in my cup, but he appeared not to have noticed my confusion. He took another slice of bread and butter; folded it carefully in two, then peered up out of the corner of his round eye at me, and added solemnly: “Sick, I regret to say, no longer.”</p>
			<p>“Dead?” I cried from the bottom of my heart, and again looked at him.</p>
			<p>Then my eyes strayed to the silent scene beyond the window, silent, it seemed, with the very presence of poor <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hubbins. “I should not like to go to Hell in the snow,” I said ruminatingly. Out of the past welled into memory an old ballad my mother had taught me:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“This ae nighte, this ae nighte</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">—<i>Every nighte and alle</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fire and sleet and candle-lighte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>And Christe receive thy saule</i>!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Beautiful, beautiful,” murmured <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble, yet not without a trace of alarm in his dark eyes. “But believe me, I am not suggesting that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hubbins⁠—His was, I am told, a wonderfully peaceful end.”</p>
			<p>“Peaceful! Oh, but surely not in his mind, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble. Surely one must be more alive in that last hour than ever⁠—just when one’s going away. At any rate,” and I couldn’t refrain a sigh, almost of envy, “I hope <i>I</i> shall be. Was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hubbins a good man?”</p>
			<p>“He was a most regular church-goer,” replied my visitor a little unsteadily; “a family-man, one of our Sidesmen, in fact. He will be greatly missed. You may remember what <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ruskin wrote of his father: ‘Here lies an entirely honest merchant.’ <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ruskin, senior, was, as a matter of fact, in the wine trade. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hubbins, I believe, was in linen, though, of course, it amounts to the same thing. But haven’t we,” and he cleared his throat, “haven’t we⁠—er⁠—strayed into a rather lugubrious subject?”</p>
			<p>“We have strayed into a rather lugubrious world,” said I.</p>
			<p>“Of course, of course; but, believe me, we mustn’t always <i>think</i> too closely. ‘Days and moments quickly flying,’ true enough, though hardly appropriate, as a matter of fact, at this particular season in the Christian year. But, on the other hand, ‘we may make our lives sublime.’ Does not yet another poet tell us that? Although, perhaps, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hub⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I interposed eagerly, the lover of books in me at once rising to the bait, “but what do you think Longfellow absolutely <i>meant</i> by his ‘sailor on the main’ of life being comforted, you remember, by somebody else having been shipwrecked and just leaving <i>footprints</i> in the sand? I used to wonder and wonder. Does the poem imply, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble, that merely to be born is to be shipwrecked? I don’t think that can be so, because Longfellow was quite a cheerful man, wasn’t he?⁠—at least for a poet. For my part,” I ran on, now thoroughly at home with my visitor, and on familiar ground, “I am sure I prefer poor Friday. Do you remember how Robinson Crusoe described him soon after the rescue from the savages as ‘without Passions, Sullenness, or Designs,’ even though he did, poor thing, ‘have a hankering stomach after some of the Flesh’? Not that I mean to suggest,” I added hastily, “that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hubbins was in any sense a cannibal.”</p>
			<p>“By no means,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble helplessly. “But there,” and he brushed his knees with his handkerchief, “I fear you are too much of a reader for me, and⁠—and critic. For that very reason I do hope, Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>, you will sometimes contrive to pay a visit to <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s. Mother Church has room for all, you know, in her⁠—about her footstool.” He smiled at me very kindly. “And our organist, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Temple, has been treating us to some charmingly quaint old carols⁠—at least the words seem a little quaint to a modern ear. But I cannot boast of being a <i>student</i> of poetry. Parochial work leaves little time even for the classics:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
				<p>
					<span>“Odi profanum vulgus, et arceo.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Favete linguis.⁠ ⁠…”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>He almost chirped the delightful words in a high, pleasant voice, but except for the first three of them, they were too many for my small Latin, and I afterwards forgot to test the aptness of his quotation. I was just about to ask him (with some little unwillingness) to translate the whole ode for me, when I heard Fanny’s step at the door. I desisted.</p>
			<p>At her entry the whole of our conversation, as it hung about in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s firelit little parlour, seemed to have become threadbare and meaningless. My visitor and I turned away from each other almost with relief⁠—like Longfellow’s shipwrecked sailors, perhaps, at sight of a ship.</p>
			<p>Fanny’s pale cheeks beneath her round beaver hat and veil were bright with the cold⁠—for frost had followed the snow. She eyed us slowly, with less even than a smile in her eyes, facing my candles softly, as if she had come out of a dream. Whatever class of the community <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble may have meant to include in his <i>Odi</i>, the celerity with which he rose to greet her made it perfectly clear that it was not Miss Bowater’s. She smiled at the black sleeve, cuff, and signet ring outstretched towards her, but made no further advance. She brought him, too, a sad disappointment, simply that she would be unable to sing at his concert on the last night of the year. At this blow <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble instinctively folded his hands. He looked helpless and distressed.</p>
			<p>“But, Miss Bowater,” he pleaded, “the printer has been waiting nearly two days for the names of your songs. The time is very short now.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Fanny, seating herself on a stool by the fire and slowly removing her gloves. “It is annoying. I hadn’t a vestige of a cold last night.”</p>
			<p>“But indeed, indeed,” he began, “is it wise in this severe weather⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it isn’t the weather I mind,” was the serene retort, “it’s the croaking like a frog in public.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘A frog!’ ” cried <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble beguilingly, “oh, no!”</p>
			<p>But all his protestations and cajoleries were unavailing. Even to a long, silent glance so private in appearance that it seemed more courteous to turn away from it, Fanny made no discernible response. His shoulders humped. He caught up his soft hat, made his adieu⁠—a little formal, and hasty⁠—and hurried off through the door to the printer.</p>
			<p>When his muffled footsteps had passed away, I looked at Fanny.</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes,” she agreed, shrugging her shoulders, “it was a lie. I said it like a lie, so that it shouldn’t deceive him. I detest all that wheedling. To come here two days running, after.⁠ ⁠… And why, may I ask, if it is beneath your dignity to dance to the parish, is it not beneath mine to sing? Let the silly sheep amuse <i>themselves</i> with their bleating. I have done with it all.”</p>
			<p>She rose, folded her gloves into a ball and her veil over her hat, and once more faced her reflection in her mother’s looking-glass. I had not the courage to tell her that the expression she wore on other occasions suited her best.</p>
			<p>“But surely,” I argued uneasily, “things are different. If I were to dance, stuck up there on a platform, you know very well it would not be the dancing that would amuse them, but⁠—just me. Would you care for that if you were⁠—well, what I am?”</p>
			<p>“Ah, you don’t know,” a low voice replied bitterly, “you don’t know. The snobs they are! I have soaked in it for years, like a pig in brine. Boxed up here in your pretty little doll’s house, you suppose that all that matters is what you think of other people. But to be perfectly frank, you are out of the running, my dear. <i>I</i> have to get my own living, and all that matters is not what I think of other people but what other people think of me. Do you suppose I don’t know what <i>he</i>, in his heart, thinks of me⁠—and all the rest of them? Well, I say, wait!”</p>
			<p>And she left me to my doll’s house⁠—a more helpless slave than ever.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Not only one “star” the fewer, then, dazzled <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s parish that New Year’s Eve, but Fanny and I never again shared an hour’s practical astronomy. Still, she would often sit and talk to me, and the chain of my devotion grew heavy. Perhaps she, on her side, merely basked in the flattery of my imagination. It was for her a new variety of a familiar experience. Perhaps a curious and condescending fondness for me for a while sprang up in her⁠—as far as that was possible, for, apart from her instinctive heartlessness, she never really accustomed herself to my physical shortcomings. I believe they attracted yet repelled her. To my lonely spirit she was a dream that remained a dream in spite of its intensifying resemblance to a nightmare.</p>
			<p>I realize now that she was desperately capricious, of a cat-like cruelty by nature, and so evasive and elusive that frequently I could not distinguish her soft, furry pads from her claws. But whatever her mood, or her treatment of me, or her lapses into a kind of commonness to which I deliberately shut my eyes, her beauty remained. Whomsoever we love becomes unique in that love, and I suppose we are responsible for what we give as well as for what we accept. The very memory of her beauty, when I was alone, haunted me as intensely as if she were present. Yet in her actual company, it made her in a sense unreal. So, often, it was only the ghost of her with whom I sat and talked. How sharply it would have incensed her to know it. When she came to me in my sleep, she was both paradise and seraph, and never fiddle entranced a Paganini as did her liquid lapsing voice my small fastidious ear. Yet, however much she loved to watch herself in looking-glass or in her mind, and to observe her effects on others, she was not vain.</p>
			<p>But the constant, unbanishable thought of anything wearies the mind and weakens the body. In my infatuation, I, too, was scarcely more than a ghost⁠—a very childish ghost perhaps. I think if I could call him for witness, my small pasha in the train from Lyndsey would bear me out in this. As for what is called passion, the only burning of it I ever felt was for an outcast with whom I never shared so much as glance or word. Alas, Fanny, I suppose, was merely a brazen image.</p>
			<p>Long before the dark day of her departure⁠—a day which stood in my thoughts like a barrier at the world’s end⁠—I had very foolishly poured out most of my memories for her profit and amusement, though so immobile was she when seated in a chair beside my table, or standing foot on fender at the chimney-piece, that it was difficult at times to decide whether she was listening to me or not. What is more important, she told me in return in her curious tortuous and contradictory fashion, a good deal about herself, and of her childhood, which⁠—because of the endless violent roarings of her nautical father, and the taciturn discipline of poor <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater⁠—filled me with compassion and heaped fuel on my love. And not least of these bonds was the secret which, in spite of endless temptation, I managed to withhold from her in a last instinctive loyalty to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater⁠—the discovery that her own mother was long since dead and gone.</p>
			<p>She possessed more brains than she cared to exhibit to visitors like <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Phelps and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble. Even to this day I cannot believe that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble even so much as guessed how clever she was. It was just part of herself, like the bloom on a plum. Hers was not one of those gesticulating minds. Her efforts only intensified her Fannyishness. Oh dear, how simple things are if only you leave them unexplained. Her very knowledge, too (which for the most part she kept to herself) was to me like finding chain armour when one is in search of a beating heart. She could shed it all, and her cleverness too, as easily as a swan water-drops. What could she not shed, and yet remain Fanny? And with all her confidences, she was extremely reticent. A lift of the light shoulders, or of the flat arched eyebrows, a sarcasm, a far-away smile, at the same time illuminated and obscured her talk. These are feminine gifts, and yet past my mastery. Perhaps for this reason I admired them the more in Fanny⁠—just as, in reading my childhood’s beloved volume, <i>The Observing Eye</i>, I had admired the crab’s cuirass and the scorpion’s horny rings⁠—because, being, after all, myself a woman, I faintly understood their purpose.</p>
			<p>Thus, when Fanny told me of the school she taught in; and of the smooth-haired drawing-master who attended it with his skill, on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays; and of the vivacious and saturnine “Monsieur Crapaud,” who, poked up in a room under the gables, lived in the house; or of that other parish curate who was a nephew of the head-mistress’s, the implacable Miss Stebbings, and who, apparently, preached Sunday after Sunday, with peculiar pertinacity, on such texts as “God is love”⁠—when Fanny recounted to me these afflictions, graces, and mockeries of her daily routine as “literature” mistress, I could as easily bestow on her the vivifying particulars she left out, as a painter can send his portraits to be framed.</p>
			<p>Once and again⁠—just as I have seen a blackbird drop plumb from the upper boughs of a tree on a worm disporting itself in the dewy mould⁠—once I did ask a question which produced in her one of those curious reactions which made her, rather than immaterial, an exceedingly vigilant image of her very self. “What will you do, Fanny, when you <i>can’t</i> mock at him?”</p>
			<p>“Him?” she inquired in a breath.</p>
			<p>“<i>The</i> him!” I said.</p>
			<p>“What him?” she replied.</p>
			<p>“Well,” I said, stumbling along down what was a rather black and unfamiliar alley to me, “my father was not, I suppose, particularly wise in anything, but my mother loved him very much.”</p>
			<p>“And <i>my</i> father,” she retorted, in words so carefully pronounced that I knew they must be dangerous, “my father was a first mate in the mercantile marine when he married your landlady.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” I repeated, “what would you do, if⁠—if <i>you</i> fell in love?”</p>
			<p>Fanny sat quite still, all the light at the window gently beating on her face, with its half-closed eyes. Her foot stirred, and with an almost imperceptible movement of her shoulder, she replied, “I shall go blind.”</p>
			<p>I looked at her, dumbfounded. All the days of her company were shrivelled up in that small sentence. “Oh, Fanny,” I whispered hopelessly, “then you know?”</p>
			<p>“ ‘Know’?” echoed the smooth lips.</p>
			<p>“Why, I mean,” I expostulated, rushing for shelter fully as rapidly as my old friend the lobster must have done when it was time to change his shell, “I mean that’s what that absurd little Frenchman is⁠—‘Monsieur Crapaud.’ ”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no,” said Fanny calmly, “<i>he</i> is not blind, he only has his eyes shut. Mine,” she added, as if the whole light of the wintry sky she faced were the mirror of her prediction, “mine will be wide open.”</p>
			<p>How did I know that for once the serene, theatrical creature was being mortally serious?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
