<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-43" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
			<p>The fact is, Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s connection with good society was rapidly drawing to a close. My smoky little candle had long since begun to gutter and sputter and enwreathe itself in a winding sheet. It went out at last in a blaze of light. For once in his life Percy had conceived a notion of which his aunt cordially approved⁠—my Birthday Banquet. Heart and soul, all my follies and misdemeanours forgotten, she entered into this new device to give her <em>Snippety</em>, her <em>Moppet</em>, her <em>Pusskinetta</em>, her little <em>Binbin</em>, her <em>Fairy</em>, her <em xml:lang="fr">Petite Sereine</em>, an exquisite setting.</p>
			<p>Invitations were sent out to the elect on inch-square cards embossed with my family crest and motto⁠—a giant, head and shoulders, brandishing a club, and <i xml:lang="la">Non Omnis Moriar</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> She not only postponed her annual departure from town, but, as did the great man in the parable, <em>compelled</em> her friends to come in. She exhausted her ingenuity on the menu. The great, on this occasion, were to feast on the tiny. A copy of it lies beside me now, though, unfortunately, I did not examine it when I sat down to dinner. Last, but not least, Percy’s pastry-cooks, Messrs Buszard, designed a seven-tiered birthday-cake, surrounded on its lowermost plateau by one-and-twenty sugar-figures, about a quarter life-size, and each of them bearing on high a silver torch.</p>
			<p>Their names were inscribed on their sugar pediments: Lady Morgan (the Windsor Fairy); Queen Elizabeth’s <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Tomysen; the Empress Julia’s Andromeda; the great little, little great Miss Billing of Tilbury; Anne Rouse and poor Ann Colling; the Sicilian <abbr>Mlle.</abbr> Caroline Crachami (who went to the anatomists); Nannette Stocker (33 inches, 33 <abbr>lbs.</abbr> avoirdupois at 33); the blessed and tender Anastasia Boruwlaski; Gaganini; the gentle Miss Selby of Bath; Alethea (the Guernsey Nymph); Madame Teresa (the Corsican Fairy); <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jeykll Skinner; the appalling Nono; <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Anne Gibson (née Shepherd); and the rest.</p>
			<p>It was a joke, none the worse, maybe, for being old; and Peter the Great must have turned in his grave in envy of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s ingenuity.</p>
			<p>It may scarcely be believed, but I had become so hardened to such little waggeries that under the genial eye of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie I made the circuit of this cake with a smile; and even scolded her for omitting the redoubtable <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bellamy with her life-size family of nine. I criticized the images too, as not to be compared, even as sugar, with the alabaster William of Windsor and Blanche, in the Tower.</p>
			<p>The truth is, when real revulsions of body and soul come, they come in a gush, all at once. Fleming, on the Night, was actually putting the last touches to my coiffure when suddenly, with a wicked curse, I turned from the great glass and announced my decision. Tiny tortoiseshell comb uplifted, she stood in the clear lustrousness looking in at my reflection, queer thoughts darting about in her eyes. At first she supposed it was but another fit of petulance. Then her hatred and disgust of me all but overcame her.</p>
			<p>She quietly argued. I insisted. But she was mortally afraid of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, and rather than deliver my message to her, sought out Susan. Poor Susan. She, too, was afraid: and it was her face rather than her love that won me over at last. Then she had to rush away to make what excuse she could for my unpunctuality. It thus came about that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s guests had already sat down to table, and were one and all being extremely amused by some story she was entertaining them with, when Marvell threw open the great mahogany doors for me, and I made my solitary entry.</p>
			<p>In primrose silk, <i xml:lang="fr">à la Pompadour</i>, a wreath of tight-shut pimpernels in my hair⁠—it is just possible that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie suspected I had chosen to come in late like this merely for effect. But that would have been an even feebler exhibition of vanity than <em>I</em> was capable of. All her guests were known to me, even though only one of them was of my choosing; for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater was in the Argentine, Sir Walter in France, Miss Fenne on her deathbed, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pellew in retreat, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble in his grave. Fanny was my all.</p>
			<p>She was sitting four or five chairs away from me on my left, between Percy (who had on his right hand a beautiful long-faced girl in turquoise green) and Captain Valentine. Further down, and on the other side of the table, sat Lady Maudlen⁠—a seal-like lady, who, according to Fanny, disapproved of me on religious grounds⁠—while I was on <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s left, and next to Lord Chiltern. Alas, even my old friend the “Black Pudding” was too far distant to do more than twinkle “Courage!” at me, when our eyes met.</p>
			<p>Recollections of that disastrous evening are clouded. So evil with dreams my nights had been that I hardly knew whether I was awake or asleep. But I recall the long perspective of the table, the beards, the busts, the pearls, the camellias and gardenias, the cornucopias, and that glistening Folly Castle, my Birthday Cake. Marvell is behind me, and Adam Waggett is ducketing in the luminous distance. The clatter of many tongues beats on my ear. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie murmurs and gently rocks. The great silver dishes dip and withdraw. Corks pop, and the fumes of meat and wine cloud into the air. In memory it is as if I myself were far away, as if I had read of the scene in a book.</p>
			<p>But two moments stand vividly out of its unreality⁠—and each of them to my shame. A small, wreathed, silver-gilt dish was placed before me. Automatically I thrust my spoon into its jelly, and pecked at the flavourless morsels. Sheer nervousness had deprived me of my sense of taste. But there was something in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s sly silence, and Lord Chiltern’s solemn monocle, and Percy’s snigger, that set me speculating.</p>
			<p>“Angelic Tomtitiska!” sighed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, “I wager when she returns to Paradise, she will sit in a corner and forget to tune her harp.”</p>
			<p>There was no shade of vexation in her voice, only amiable amusement; but those sitting near had overheard her little pleasantry, and smilingly watched me as, casting my eye down the menu⁠—<i xml:lang="fr">Consommé aux Nids d’Hirondelles</i>, <i xml:lang="fr">Filets de Blanchailles à la Diable</i>, <i xml:lang="fr">Ailes de Caille aux petits pois Minnie Stratton</i>, <i xml:lang="fr">Sauterelles aux Caroubes Saint Jean</i>, it was caught at last by a pretty gilt flourishing around the words, <i xml:lang="fr">Suprême de Langues de Rossignols</i>. This, then, was the dainty jest, the <i xml:lang="fr">clou du repas</i>. The faint gold words shimmered back at me. In an instant I was a child again at Lyndsey, lulling to sleep on my pillow amid the echoing songs of the nightingales that used to nest in its pleasant lanes. I sat flaming, my tongue clotted with disgust. I simply couldn’t swallow; and didn’t. But never mind.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>This was my first mishap. Though her own appetite was capricious, ranging from an almost incredible voracity to a scrap of dry toast, nothing vexed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie so much as to see my poor, squeamish stomach revolting at the sight of meat. She drew up a naked shoulder against me, and the feast proceeded with its chief guest in the shade. Once I could soon have regained my composure. Now I languished, careless even of the expression on my face. Not even the little mincing smile Fanny always reserved for me in company could restore me, and it was at her whisper that Percy stole down and filled my acorn glass with a translucent green liquid which he had himself secured from the sideboard. I watched the slow, green flow of it from the lip of the decanter without a thought in my head. Lord Chiltern endeavoured to restore my drooping spirits. I had outrageously misjudged him. He was <em>not</em> one of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s stupid friends, and he really did his utmost to be kind to me. If he should ever read these words, may he be sure that Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> is grateful. But his kindness fell on stony ground. And when, at length, he rose to propose my health, I crouched beneath him shameful, haggard, and woebegone.</p>
			<p>It was as minute a speech as was she whom it flattered, and far more graceful. Nothing, of course, would satisfy its audience when the toast had been honoured, but that Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> should reply. One single, desperate glance I cast at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie. She sat immovable as the Sphinx. There was no help for it. Knees knocking together, utterly tongue-tied, I stood up in my chair, and surveyed the two converging rows of smiling, curious faces. Despair gave me counsel. I stooped, raised my glass, and half in dread, half in bravado, tossed down its burning contents at a gulp.</p>
			<p>The green syrup coursed along vein and artery like molten lead. A horrifying transparency began to spread over my mind. It seemed it had become in that instant empty and radiant as a dome of glass. All sounds hushed away. Things near faded into an infinite distance. Every face, glossed with light as if varnished, became lifeless, brutal, and inhuman, the grotesque caricature of a shadowy countenance that hung somewhere remote in memory, yet was invisible and irrevocable. In this dead moment⁠—the whole blazing scene like a nowhere of the imagination⁠—my wandering eyes met Fanny’s. She was softly languishing up at Captain Valentine, her fingers toying with a rose. And it seemed as though her once loved spirit cried homelessly out at me from space, as if for refuge and recognition; and a long-hidden flood broke bounds in my heart. All else forgotten, and obeying mechanically the force of long habit, I stepped up from my chair on to the table, and staggered towards her, upsetting, as I went, a shallow glass of bubbling wine. It reeked up in the air around me.</p>
			<p>“Fanny, Fanny,” I called to her out of my swoon, “Ah, Fanny. Holy Dying, Holy Dying! <i xml:lang="fr">Sauve qui peut!</i>” With empty, shocking face, she started back, appalled, like a wounded snake.</p>
			<p>“Oh!” she cried in horror into the sleep that was now mounting my body like a cloud, “oh!” Her hand swept out blindly in my direction as if to fend me off. At best my balance was insecure; and though the velvet petals of her rose scarcely grazed my cheek, the insane glaze of my mind was already darkening, I toppled and fell in a heap beside her plate.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
