<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h2>
			<p>Miss Monnerie’s visits were less punctual though more frequent than Percy Maudlen’s. “And where is the toadlet?” I heard him drawl one afternoon as I was being carried downstairs by the light-footed Fleming, on the padded tray which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie had had made for the purpose.</p>
			<p>“The toadlet, my dear Percy, is about to take a little gentle exercise with me in the garden, and you shall accompany us. If you were the kind of fairytale hero I used to read of in my nursery, you would discover the charm, and live happy ever after. But I see nothing of the heroic in you, and little of the hereafter. Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> is a feast of mercies.”</p>
			<p>“H’m. Providence packs his mercies into precious small quarters at times,” he yawned.</p>
			<p>“Which suggests an uncivil speculation,” replied his aunt, “on the size of your hat.”</p>
			<p>“But candidly, Aunt Alice,” he retorted, “is your little <i>attachée</i> quite all there⁠—I mean, all of her that there is? Personally I wouldn’t touch her, if I could help it, with a pair of tongs.⁠ ⁠… A nasty trick!”</p>
			<p>Then, “Hah!” cried <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie in a large, pleasant voice, “here is Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name" class="eoc">M.</abbr> Percy has been exposing a wounded heart, precious one. He is hurt because you look at him as if there were positively nothing more of him than what is there to see.”</p>
			<p>“Not at all, Aunt Alice,” Percy drawled, with a jerk of his cane. “It was for precisely the opposite reason. Who knows you ain’t a witch, Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name" class="eoc">M.</abbr>? Distilled? Heavens, Aunt Alice! you are not bringing Cherry <i>too</i>?”</p>
			<p>Yes, Cherry was coming too, with his globular eye and sneering nose. And so poor Percy, with a cold little smile on his fine pale features, had to accommodate himself to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s leisurely pace, and she to mine, while Cherry disdainfully shuffled in our rear. We were a singular quartette, though there were only two or three small children in the palisaded garden to enjoy the spectacle; and they, after a few polite and muffled giggles, returned to their dolls.</p>
			<p>It was a stifling afternoon. As I trod the yellow gravel the quivering atmosphere all but blinded me with its reflected glare. The only sounds to be heard were the clang of a milkman’s handcart, and the pirouettes of a distant piano.</p>
			<p>“And what,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie suddenly inquired, looking down on me, with mauve-tinted cheek, from under her beribanded, long-handled parasol, “what is Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> thinking about?”</p>
			<p>As a matter of fact I was walking at that moment in imagination with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater at Lyme Regis, but I seized the opportunity of hastening round from between aunt and nephew so that I could screen myself from the sun in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s ample shadow, and inquired why London gardeners were so much attached to geraniums, lobelias, calceolarias, and ice-plants? Mightn’t one just as well <i>paint</i> the border, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, red, yellow, and blue? Then it would last⁠—rain, snow, anything.</p>
			<p>“Now I’ll wager, Percy, you hadn’t noticed <i>that</i>,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie in triumph.</p>
			<p>“I make it a practice,” he replied, “never to notice the obvious. It is merely a kind of least common denominator, as I believe you call ’em, and,” he wafted away a yawn with his glove, “I take no interest in vulgar fractions.”</p>
			<p>I took a little look at him out of the corner of my eye, and wished that as a child I had paid more heed to my arithmetic lessons. “Look, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie,” I cried piteously, “poor Cherry’s tongue is dangling right out of his head. He looks <i>so</i> hot and tired.”</p>
			<p>She swept me a radiant, if contorted, gleam. “Percy, would you take pity on poor dear Cherry? Twice round, I think, will be as much as I can comfortably manage.”</p>
			<p>So Percy had to take poor dear Cherry into his arms, just like a baby; and the quartette to all appearance became a trio.</p>
			<p>But my existence at <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 was not always so monotonous as that. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, in spite of her age, her ebony cane, and a tendency to breathlessness, was extremely active and alert. If life is a fountain, she preferred to be one of the larger bubbles as near as possible to its summit. She almost succeeded in making me a minute replica of herself. We shared the same manicurist, milliner, modiste, and coiffeur. And since it was not always practicable for Mahometta to be carried off to these delectable mountains, they were persuaded to attend upon her, and that as punctually as the fawn-faced man, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godde, who came to wind the clocks.</p>
			<p>Whole mornings were spent in conclave in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s boudoir⁠—Susan sometimes of our company. Julius Caesar, so my little Roman history told me, had hesitated over the crossing of one Rubicon. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie and I confabulated over the fording of a dozen of its tributaries a day. A specialist⁠—a singularly bald man in a long black coat⁠—was called in. He eyed me this way, he eyed me that⁠—with far more deference than I imagine <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pellew can have paid me at my christening. He assured <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie of his confirmed belief that the mode of the moment was not of the smallest consequence so far as I was concerned. “The hard, small hat,” he smiled; “the tight-fitting sleeve!” And yet, to judge by the clothes he did recommend, I must have been beginning to look a pretty dowd at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s.</p>
			<p>“But even if Madam prefers to dress in a style of her own choice,” he explained, “the difference, if she will understand, must still be <i>in</i> the fashion.”</p>
			<p>But he himself⁠—though <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, I discovered after he was gone, had not even noticed that he was bald⁠—he himself interested me far more than his excellent advice; and not least when he drew some papers out of a pocketbook, and happened to let fall on the carpet the photograph of a fat little boy with an immense mop of curls. So men⁠—quite elderly, practical men, can blush, I thought to myself; for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Phelps had rather flushed than blushed; and my father used only to get red.</p>
			<p>Since nothing, perhaps, could make me more exceptional in appearance than I had been made by Providence, I fell in with all <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s fancies, and wore what she pleased⁠—pushing out of mind as well as I could all thought of bills. I did more than that. I really began to enjoy dressing myself up as if I were my own doll, and when alone I would sit sometimes in a luxurious trance, like a lily in a pot. Yet I did not entirely abandon my old little Bowater habit of indoor exercise. When I was alone in my room I would sometimes skip. And on one of Fleming’s afternoons “out” I even furbished up what I could remember of my four kinds of Kentish hopscotch, with a slab of jade for dump. But in the very midst of such recreations I would surprise myself lost in a kind of vacancy. Apart from its humans and its furniture, <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 was an empty house.</p>
			<p>I do not mean that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie was concerned only with externals. Sir William Forbes-Smith advised that a little white meat should enrich my usual diet of milk and fruit, and that I should have sea-salt baths. The latter were more enjoyable than the former, though both, no doubt, helped to bring back the strength sapped out of me by the West End.</p>
			<p>My cheekbones gradually rounded their angles; a livelier colour came to lip and skin, and I began to be as self-conscious as a genuine beauty. One twilight, I remember, I had slipped across from out of my bath for a pinch of the “crystals” which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie had presented me with that afternoon; for my nose, also, was accustoming itself to an artificial life. An immense cheval looking-glass stood there, and at one and the same instant I saw not only my own slim, naked, hastening figure reflected in its placid deeps, but, behind me, that of Fleming, shadowily engrossed. With a shock I came to a standstill, helplessly meeting her peculiar stare. Only seven yards or so of dusky air divided us. Caught back by this unexpected encounter, for one immeasurable moment I stood thus, as if she and I were mere shapes in a picture, and reality but a thought.</p>
			<p>Then suddenly she recovered herself, and with a murmur of apology was gone. Huddled up in my towel, I sat motionless, shrunken for a while almost to nothing in the dense sense of shame that had swept over me. Then suddenly I flung myself on my knees, and prayed⁠—though what about and to whom I cannot say. After which I went back and bathed myself again.</p>
			<p>The extravagances of Youth! No doubt, the worst pang was that though vaguely I knew that my most secret solitude had been for a while destroyed, that long intercepted glance of half-derisive admiration had filled me with something sweeter than distress. If only I knew what common-sized people really feel like in similar circumstances. Biographies tell me little; and can one trust what is said in novels? The only <i>practical</i> result of this encounter was that I emptied all <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s priceless crystals forthwith into my bath, and vowed never, never again to desert plain water. So, for one evening, my room smelt like a garden in Damascus.</p>
			<p>As for Fleming, she never, of course, referred to this incident, but our small talk was even smaller than before. If, indeed, to Percy, “toadlet” was the aptest tag for me; for Fleming, I fancy, “stuck-up” sufficed. Instinct told her that she was only by courtesy a <i>lady’s</i>-maid.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Less for her own sake than for mine, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie and I scoured London for amusement, even though she was irritated a little by my preference for the kind which may be called instructive. The truth is, that in all this smooth idleness and luxury a hunger for knowledge had seized on me; as if (cat to grass) my mind were in search of an antidote.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie had little difficulty in securing “private views.” She must have known everybody that is anybody⁠—as I once read of a Countess in a book. And I suppose there is not a very large number of this kind of person. Whenever our social engagements permitted, we visited the show places, galleries, and museums. Unlike the rest of London, I gazed at Amenhotep’s Mummy in the late dusk of a summer evening; and we had much to say to one another; though but one whiff of the huge round library gave me a violent headache. When the streets had to be faced, Fleming came with us in the carriage, and I was disguised to look as much like a child as possible⁠—a process that made me feel at least twenty years older. The Tower of London, the Zoo, Westminster Abbey, <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s⁠—each in turn fell an early prey to my hunger for learning and experience. As for the Thames; the very sight of it seemed to wash my small knowledge of English history clear as crystal.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie yawned her way on⁠—though my comments on these marvels of human enterprise occasionally amused her. I made amends, too, by accompanying her to less well-advertised showplaces, and patiently sat with her while she fondled unset and antique gems in a jeweller’s, or inspected the china, miniatures, and embroideries in private collections. If the mere look of the books in the British Museum gave me a headache, it is curious that the Chamber of Horrors at Madame Tussaud’s Wax Works did not. And yet I don’t know; life itself had initiated me into this freemasonry. I surveyed the guillotine without a shudder, and eyed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hare and Charles Peace with far less discomposure than General Tom Thumb, or even Robert Burns in the respectable gallery above. My one misfortune was that I could look at no murderer without instantly recomposing the imaginary scene of his crime within my mind. And as after a while <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie decided to rest on a chair set for her by the polite attendant under the scaffold, and we had the Chamber nearly to ourselves, I wandered on alone, and perhaps supped rather too full of horrors for one evening.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie would often question me. “Well, what do you think of that, Mammetinka?” or, “Now, then, my inexhaustible little Miss Aristotle, discourse on that.”</p>
			<p>And like a bullfinch I piped up in response to the best of my ability. My answers, I fear, were usually evasive. For I had begun to see that she was making experiments on my mind and senses, as well as on my manners and body. She was a “fancier.” And one day I ogled up at her with the pert remark that she now possessed a pocket barometer which would do its very utmost to remain at 31°, if that was possible without being “Very Dry.”</p>
			<p>She received this little joke with extraordinary good humour. “When I come down in the world, my dear,” she said, “and these horrid anarchists are doing their best to send us all sky-high first, we’ll visit the Courts of Europe together, like Count Boruwlaski. Do you think you could bring yourself to support your old friend in her declining years in a declining age?”</p>
			<p>I smiled and touched her glove. “Where thou goest, I will go,” I replied; and then could have bitten off my tongue in remorse. “Pah,” gasped a secret voice, “so that’s going the same way too, is it?”</p>
			<p>Yet heaven knows I was not a Puritan⁠—and never shall be. I just adored things bright and beautiful. Music, too, in moderation, was my delight; and Susan Monnerie with her small, sweet voice would sometimes sing to me in one room while⁠—in an almost unbearable homesickness⁠—I listened in another. Concerts in general, however, left every muscle of my body as stiff with rheumatism as it was after my visit to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moss’s farmhouse. The unexpected blare of a brass band simply froze my spine; and a really fine performance on the piano was sheer torture. Once, indeed, when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s carriage was one of a mellay clustered together while the Queen drove by, in the appalling clamour of the Lancers’ trombones and kettledrums, I fell prostrate in a kind of fit. So it was my silly nerves that cheated me of my one and only chance to huzza a Crowned Head not, if I may say so without disrespect, so very many sizes larger than my own.</p>
			<p>Alas, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie was an enthusiast for all the pleasures of the senses. I verily believe that it was only my vanity which prevented me from becoming as inordinately fat as Sir William Forbes-Smith’s white meat threatened to make me.</p>
			<p>Brightest novelty of all was my first visit to a theatre⁠—the London night, the glare and clamour of the streets, the packed white rows of faces, the sea-like noise of talk, the glitter, shimmer, dazzle⁠—it filled my veins with quicksilver; my heart seemed to be throbbing in my breast as fast as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s watch. Fortunately she had remembered to take our seats on the farther side from the brass and drums of the orchestra. I restrained my shivers; the lights went out; and in the congregated gloom softly stole up the curtain on the ballet.</p>
			<p>Perched up there in the velvet obscurity of our box, I surveyed a woodland scene, ruins, distant mountains, a rocky stream on which an enormous moon shone, and actually moved in the theatrical heavens. And when an exquisite figure floated, pale, gauzy, and a-tiptoe, into those artificial solitudes, drenched with filmy light; with a far cry of “Fanny!” my heart suddenly stood still; and all the old stubborn infatuation flooded heavily back upon me once more.</p>
			<p>Susan sat ghostlike, serenely smiling. Percy’s narrow jaws were working on their hinges like those of a rabbit I had seen through my grandfather’s spyglass nibbling a root of dandelion. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie reclined in her chair, hands on lap, with pursed-up mouth and weary eyes. There was nobody to confide in, then. But when from either side of the brightening stage flocked in winged creatures with lackadaisical arms and waxlike smilings, whose paint and powder caught back my mind rather than my feelings, my first light-of-foot was hovering beneath us close to the flaring footlights; and she was now no more Fanny than the circle of illuminated parchment over her head was the enchanting moon. What a complicated world it was with all these <i>layers</i>! The experience filled me with a hundred disquieting desires, and yet again, chiefest of them was that which made sensitive the stumps where, if I turned into a bird, my wings would grow, and which bade me “escape.”</p>
			<p>“She’s getting devilish old and creaky on her pins,” yawned Percy, when the curtain had descended, and I had sighingly shrunk back into my own tasselled nook from the noise and emptiness of actuality.</p>
			<p>“No,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, “it is you, Percy, who are getting old. You were born blasé. You’ll be positively yawning your head off at the Last Trump.”</p>
			<p>“Dear Aunt Alice,” said Percy, squinting through his opera-glasses, “nothing of the kind. I shall be helping you to find the mislaid knucklebones. Besides, it’s better to be born⁠—”</p>
			<p>But the rest of his sentence⁠—and I listened to him only because I hated him⁠—passed unheeded, for all my attention had been drawn to Susan. The hand beside me had suddenly clutched at her silk skirt, and a flush, gay as the Queen’s Union Jacks in Bond Street, had mounted into her clear, pale cheek, as with averted chin she sat looking down upon someone in the stalls. At sight of her blushing, a richer fondness for her lightened my mind. I followed her eye to its goal, and gazed enthralled, now up, now down, stringing all kinds of little beads of thoughts together; until, perhaps conscious that she was being watched, she turned and caught me. Flamed up her cheeks yet hotter; and now mine too; for my spirits had suddenly sunk into my shoes at the remembrance of Wanderslore and my “ghostly, gloating little dwarfish creature.” Then once more darkness stole over the vast, quieting house, and the curtain re-ascended upon Romance.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
