<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
			<p>Once more I sat down, but this time in the midst of what seemed to me a rather unpleasant silence, as if the room had grown colder: a silence which was broken only by the distant whistlings of a thrush. At one and the same moment both <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pellew and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble returned to teacups which I should have supposed must have, by this time, been empty, and Lady Pollacke’s widowed sister folded up her lorgnette.</p>
			<p>“My dear Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie dryly, with an almost wicked ray of amusement in her deep-set eyes, “wherever the top of Beechwood Hill may be, and whatever supplies of food may be caught on its crest, there is no doubt that <em>you</em> have been provided with the means of defending yourself. But tell me now, what do you think, perhaps, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <em>Pellew’s</em> little ‘instruments’ are? Or, better still⁠—mine? Am I a mollusc with a hard shell, or a scorpion with a sting?”</p>
			<p>Lady Pollacke rose to her feet and stood looking down on me like a hen, though not exactly a motherly one. But this was a serious question over which I must not be flustered, so I took my time. I folded my hands, and fixed a long, long look on <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie. Even after all these years, I confess it moves me to recall it.</p>
			<p>“Of course, really and truly,” I said at last, as deferentially as I could, “I haven’t known you long enough to say. But I should think, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, you always knew the truth.”</p>
			<p>I was glad I had not been too impetuous. My reply evidently pleased her. She chuckled all over.</p>
			<p>“Ah,” she said reposefully, “the truth. And that is why, I suppose, like Sleeping Beauty, I am so thickly hedged in with the thorns and briers of affection. Well, well, there’s one little truth we’ll share alone, you and I.” She raised herself in her chair and stooped her great face close to my ear: “We must know more of one another, my dear,” she whispered. “I have taken a great fancy to you. We must meet again.” She hoisted herself up. Sir Walter Pollacke had hastened in and stood smiling, with arm hooked, and genial, beaming countenance in front of her. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble had already vanished. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pellew was talking earnestly with Lady Pollacke. Conversation broke out, like a storm-shower, on every side. For a while I was extraordinarily alone.</p>
			<p>Into this derelict moment a fair-cheeked, breathless lady descended, and surreptitiously thrusting a crimson padded birthday book and a miniature pencil into my lap, entreated my autograph⁠—“Just your signature, you know⁠—for my small daughter. How she would have <em>loved</em> to be here!”</p>
			<p>This lady cannot have been many years older than I, and one of those instantaneous, fleeting affections sprang up in me as I looked up at her for the first and only time, and seemed to see that small daughter smiling at me out of her face.</p>
			<p>Alas, such is vanity. I turned over the leaves to August 30th and found printed there, for motto, a passage from Shakespeare:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“He that has had a little tiny wit⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hey, ho, the wind and the rain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must make content with his fortunes fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the rain it raineth every day.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The 29th was little less depressing, from Samuel Taylor Coleridge:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“He prayeth best who loveth best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All creatures great and small.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>This would never do. I bent double over the volume, turned back hastily three or four leaves, and scrawled in my name under August 25th on a leaf that bore the quotation:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Fie on’t; ah, fie! ‘ ’tis an unweeded garden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possess it merely. That it should come to this!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">and beneath the quotation, the signature of Josephine Mildred Spratte.</p>
			<p>“Thank you, <em>thank</em> you, she will be overjoyed,” blushed the fair-haired lady. A sudden hunger for solitude seized upon me. I rose hastily, conscious for the first time of a headache, caused, no doubt, by the expensive and fumey perfumes in the air. Threading my way between the trains and flounces and trouser-legs around me, at last my adieux were over. I was in the porch⁠—in the carriage. The breezes of heaven were on my cheek. My blessed parlourmaid was once more installed beside me. Yet even now the Pollacke faces were still flocking in my mind. The outside world was very sluggishly welling in. Looking up so long had stiffened my neck. I fixed my eyes on the crested back buttons of Lady Pollacke’s stiff-looking coachman, and committed myself to my thoughts.</p>
			<p>It was to a Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>, with one of her own handkerchiefs laid over her brows, and sprinkled with vinegar and lavender water, that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater brought in supper that evening. We had one of our broken talks together, none the less. But she persisted in desultory accounts of Fanny’s ailments in her infancy; and I had to drag in Brunswick House by myself. At which she poked the fire and was mum. It was unamiable of her. I longed to share my little difficulties and triumphs. Surely she was showing rather too much of that discrimination which Lady Pollacke had recommended.</p>
			<p>She snorted at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pellew, she snorted at my friendly parlourmaid and even at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie. Even when I repeated for her ear alone my nursery passage from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Observing Eye</i>, her only comment was that to judge from <em>some</em> fine folk she knew of, there was no doubt at all that God watched closely over the pleasures of the meanest of His creatures, but as for their doing His will, she hadn’t much noticed it.</p>
			<p>To my sigh of regret that Fanny had not been at home to accompany me, she retorted with yet another onslaught on the fire, and the apophthegm, that the world would be a far better place if people kept themselves <em>to</em> themselves.</p>
			<p>“But <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater,” I argued fretfully, “if I did that, I should just⁠—distil, as you might say, quite away. Besides, Fanny would have been far, far the⁠—the gracefullest person there. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie would have taken a fancy to <em>her</em>, now, if you like.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater drew in her lips and rubbed her nose. “God forbid,” she said.</p>
			<p>But it was her indifference to the impression that I myself had made on <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie that nettled me the most. “Why, then, who <em>is</em> Lord <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr>?” I inquired impatiently at last, pushing back the bandage that had fallen over my eyes.</p>
			<p>“From what I’ve heard of Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr>,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater shortly, “he was a gentleman of whom the less heard of’s the better.”</p>
			<p>“But surely,” I protested, “that isn’t <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s fault any more than Fanny’s being so lovely⁠—I mean, than I being a midget was my father’s fault? Anyhow,” I hurried on, “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie says I look pale, and must go to the sea.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater was still kneeling by the fire, just as Fanny used to kneel. And, like Fanny, when one most expected an answer, she remained silent; though, unlike Fanny, it seemed to be not because she was dreaming of something else. How shall I express it?⁠—there fell a kind of loneliness between us. The severe face made no sign.</p>
			<p>“Would you⁠—would you miss me?” some silly self within piped out pathetically.</p>
			<p>“Why, for the matter of that,” was her sardonic reply, “there’s not very much of you to miss.”</p>
			<p>I rose from my bed, flung down the bandage, and ran down my little staircase. “Oh, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater,” I said, burying my face in her camphory skirts, “be kind to me; be kind to me! I’ve nobody but you.”</p>
			<p>The magnanimous creature stroked my vinegar-sodden hair with the tips of her horny fingers. “Why there, miss. I meant no harm. Isn’t all the gentry and nobility just gaping to snatch you up? You won’t want your old <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater very long. What’s more, you mustn’t get carried away by yourself. You never know where that journey ends. If sea it is, sea it must be. Though, Lord preserve us, the word’s no favourite of mine.”</p>
			<p>“But suppose, suppose, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater,” I cried, starting up and smiling enrapturedly into her face, “suppose we could go together!”</p>
			<p>“That,” said she, with a look of astonishing benignity, “would be just what I was being led to suppose was the heighth of the impossible.”</p>
			<p>At which, of course, we at once began discussing ways and means. But, delicious though this prospect seemed, I determined that nothing should persuade me to go unless all hope of Fanny’s coming home proved vain. Naturally, from Fanny memory darted to Wanderslore. I laughed up at my landlady, holding her finger, and suggested demurely that we should go off together on the morrow to see if my stranger were true to his word.</p>
			<p>“We have kept him a very long time, and if, as you seem to think, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie isn’t such a wonderful lady, you may decide that after all <em>he</em> is a gentleman.”</p>
			<p>She enjoyed my little joke, was pleased that I had been won over, but refused to accept my reasoning, though the topic itself was after her heart.</p>
			<p>“The point is, miss, not whether your last conquest is a wonderful lady, or a grand lady, or even a perfect lady for the matter of that, but, well, a <em>lady</em>. It’s that’s the kind in my experience that comes nearest to being as uncommon a sort as any sort of a good woman.”</p>
			<p>This was a wholly unexpected vista for me, and I peered down its smooth, green, aristocratic sward with some little awe.</p>
			<p>“As for the young fellow who made himself so free in his manners,” she went on placidly, so that I had to scamper back to pick her up again, “I have no doubt seeing will be believing.”</p>
			<p>“But what is the story of Wanderslore?” I pressed her none too honestly.</p>
			<p>The story⁠—and this time <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater poured it out quite freely⁠—was precisely what I had been told already, but with the addition that the young woman who had hanged herself in one of its attics had done so for jealousy.</p>
			<p>“Jealousy! But of whom?” I inquired.</p>
			<p>“Her husband’s, not her own: driven wild by his.”</p>
			<p>“You really mean,” I persisted, “that she couldn’t endure to live any longer because her husband loved her so much that he couldn’t bear anybody else to love her too?”</p>
			<p>“In some such measure,” replied <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, “though I don’t say he didn’t help the other way round. But she was a wild, scattering creature. It was just her way. The less she cared, the more they flocked. She couldn’t <em>collect</em> herself, and say, ‘Here I am; who are you?’ so to speak. Ah, miss, it’s a sickly and dangerous thing to be too much admired.”</p>
			<p>“But you said ‘scattering’: was she mad a little?”</p>
			<p>“No. Peculiar, perhaps, with her sidelong, startled look. A lovelier I’ve never seen.”</p>
			<p>“You’ve seen her!”</p>
			<p>“Thirty years ago, perhaps. Alive <em>and</em> dead.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, poor thing, poor thing.”</p>
			<p>“That you may well say, for lovely in the latter finding she was not.”</p>
			<p>My eyes were fixed on the fire, but the picture conjured up was dark even amidst the red-hot coals. “And he? did he die too? At least his jealousy was broken away.”</p>
			<p>“And I’m not so sure of that,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater. “It’s like the men to go on wanting, even when it comes to scrabbling at a grave. And there’s a trashy sort of creature, though well-set-up enough from the outside, that a spark will put in a blaze. I’ve no doubt he was that kind.”</p>
			<p>I thought of my own sparks, but questioned on: “Then there’s nothing else but⁠—but her ghost there now?”</p>
			<p>“Lor, <em>ghosts</em>, miss, it’s an hour, I see, when bed’s the proper place for you and me. I look to be scared by that kind of gentry when they come true.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t believe, then, in <em>Destroyers</em>, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater?”</p>
			<p>“Miss, it’s those queer books you are reading,” was the evasive reply. “ ‘Destroyers’! Why, wasn’t it cruel enough to drive that poor featherbrained creature into a noose!”</p>
			<p>Candle and I and drowsing cinders kept company until <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s bell had told only the sleepless that midnight was over the world. It seemed to my young mind that there was not a day, scarcely an hour, I lived, but that Life was unfolding itself in ever new and ravishing disguises. I had not begun to be in the least tired or afraid of it. Smallest of bubbles I might be, tossing on the great waters, but I reflected the universe. What need of courage when no danger was apparent? Surely one need not mind being different if that difference added to one’s share in the wonderful Banquet. Even Wanderslore’s story was only of what happened when the tangle was so harshly knotted that no mortal fingers could unravel it. And though my own private existence now had <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie⁠—and all that <em>she</em> might do and mean and be⁠—to cope with, as well as my stranger who was yet another queer story and as yet mine alone, these complications were enticing. One must just keep control of them; that was all. At which I thought a little unsteadily of Fanny’s “pin,” and remembered that that pin was helping to keep her and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble from being torn apart.</p>
			<p>He had seemed so peering a guest at Brunswick House. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie hadn’t so much as glanced at him when he had commented on <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Browning’s poems. There seemed to be a shadow over whatever he did. It was as though there could be a sadness in the very coursing of one’s blood. How thankful I felt that mine hadn’t been a really flattering reply to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s question. She was extremely arrogant, even for a younger daughter of a lord. On the other hand, though, of course, the sheer novelty of me had had something to do with it, she had certainly singled me out afterwards to know what I <em>thought</em>, and in thoughts there is no particular size, only effusiveness⁠—no, <em>piercingness</em>. I smiled to myself at the word, pitied my godmother for living so sequestered a life, and wondered how and why it was that my father and mother had so obstinately shut me away from the world. If only Fanny was coming home⁠—what a difference she would find in her fretful Midge! And with that, I discovered that my feet were cold and that my headache had ached itself away.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
