<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
			<p>For many days my mind was an empty husk, yet in a constant torment of longing, daydream, despair, and self-reproaches. Everything I looked at had but one meaning⁠—that she was not there. I did not dare to admit into my heart a hope of the future, since it would be treason to the absent. There was an ecstatic mournfulness even in the sight of the January sun, the greening fields, the first scarcely perceptible signals of a new year. And when one morning I awoke early and heard, still half in dream, a thrush in all but darkness singing of spring, it seemed it was a voice pealing in the empty courts of paradise. What ridiculous care I took to conceal my misery from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater. Hardly a morning passed but that I carried out in a bag the food I couldn’t eat the day before, to hide it away or bury it. But such journeys were brief.</p>
			<p>I have read somewhere that love is a disease. Or is it that Life piles up the fuel, a chance stranger darts a spark, and the whole world goes up in smoke? Was I happier in that fever than I am in this literary calm? Why did love for things without jealousy or envy fill me with delight, pour happiness into me, and love for Fanny parch me up, suck every other interest from my mind, and all but blind my eyes? Is that true? I cannot be sure: for to remember her ravages is as difficult as to reassemble the dismal phantoms that flock into a delirious brain. And still to be honest⁠—there’s another chance: Was she to blame? Would my mind have been at peace even in its solitary woe if she had dealt truly with me? Would anyone believe it?⁠—it never occurred to me to remind myself that it might be a question merely of size. Simply because I loved, I deemed myself lovable. Yet in my heart of hearts that afternoon I had been twitting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble for saying his prayers!</p>
			<p>But even the heart is Phœnix-like. The outer world began to break into my desolation, not least successfully when after a week or two of absence there came a post card from Fanny to her mother with a mere “love to <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M.</abbr>” scrawled in its top right-hand corner. It was as if a wineglass of cold water had been poured down my back. It was followed by yet another little “shock.” One evening, when she had carefully set down my bowl of rusk and milk, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater took up her stand opposite to me, black as an image in wood. “You haven’t been after your stars, miss, of late. It’s moping you are. I suffered myself from the same greensick fantasticalities, when <em>I</em> was a girl. Not that a good result’s any the better for a poor cause; but it was courting danger with your frail frame; it was indeed.”</p>
			<p>I smile in remembrance of the picture presented by that conscience-stricken face of mine upturned to that stark monitor⁠—a monitor no less stark at this very moment though we are both many years older.</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes,” she continued, and even the dun, fading photograph over her head might have paled at her accents. “I’m soliciting no divulgements; she wouldn’t have gone alone, and if she did, would have heard of it from me. But you must please remember, miss, I am her mother. And you will remember, miss, also,” she added, with upper lip drawn even tighter, “that your care is my care, and always will be while you are under my roof⁠—and after, please God.”</p>
			<p>She soundlessly closed the door behind her, as if in so doing she were shutting up the whole matter in her mind forever, as indeed she was, for she never referred to it again. Thunderbolts fall quietly at times. I sat stupefied. But as I examine that distant conscience, I am aware, first, of a faint flitting of the problem through my mind as to why a freedom which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater would have denied to Fanny should have held no dangers for me, and next, I realize that of all the emotions in conflict within me, humiliation stood head and shoulders above the rest. Indeed I flushed all over, at the thought that never for one moment⁠—then or since⁠—had I paused to consider how, on that fateful midnight, Fanny could have left the house-door <em>bolted</em> behind her. My utter stupidity: and Fanny’s! All these weeks my landlady had known, and said nothing. The green gooseberries of my childhood were a far less effective tonic. But I lost no love for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater in this prodigious increase of respect.</p>
			<p>A far pleasanter interruption of my sick longings for the absent one occurred the next morning. At a loss what to be reading (for Fanny had abstracted my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wuthering Heights</i> and taken it away with her), once more shudderingly pushing aside my breakfast, I turned over the dusty, faded pile of Bowater books. And in one of them I discovered a chapter on knots. Our minds are cleverer than we think them, and not only cats have an instinct for physicking themselves. I took out a piece of silk twine from my drawer and⁠—with Fanny’s phantom sulking a while in neglect⁠—set myself to the mastery of “the ship boy’s” science. I had learned forever to distinguish between the granny and the reef (such is fate, this knot was also called the true lover’s!), and was setting about the fisherman’s bend, when there came a knock on the door⁠—and then a head.</p>
			<p>It was Pollie. Until I saw her round, red, country cheek, and stiff Sunday hat, thus unexpectedly appear, I had almost forgotten how much I loved and had missed her. No doubt my landlady had been the <i xml:lang="la">dea ex machina</i> that had produced her on this fine sunshine morning. Anyhow she was from heaven. Besides butter, a posy of winter jasmine, a crochet bedspread, and a varnished arbour chair made especially for me during the winter evenings by her father, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Muggeridge, she brought startling news. There suddenly fell a pause in our excited talk. She drew out her handkerchief and a slow crimson mounted up over neck, cheek, ears, and brow. I couldn’t look quite away from this delicious sight, so my eyes wandered up in admiration of the artificial cornflowers and daisies in her hat.</p>
			<p>Whereupon she softly blew her nose and, with a gliding glance at the shut door, she breathed out her secret. She was engaged to be married. A trying, romantic vapour seemed instantly to gather about us, in whose hush I was curiously aware not only of Pollie thus suffused, sitting with her hands loosely folded in her lap, but of myself also, perched opposite to her with eyes in which curiosity, incredulity, and even a remote consternation played upon her homely features. Time melted away, and there once more sat the old Pollie⁠—a gawk of a girl in a pinafore, munching up green apples and re-plaiting her dull brown hair.</p>
			<p>Then, of course, I was bashfully challenged to name the happy man. I guessed and guessed to Pollie’s ever-increasing gusto, and at last I dared my first unuttered choice: “Well, then, it <em>must</em> be Adam Waggett!”</p>
			<p>“Adam Waggett! Oh, miss, him! a nose like a winebottle.”</p>
			<p>It was undeniable. I apologized, and Pollie surrendered her future into my hands. “It’s Bob Halibut, miss,” she whispered hoarsely.</p>
			<p>And instantaneously Bob Halibut’s red head loomed louringly out at me. But I know little about husbands; and premonitions only impress us when they come true. Time was to prove that Pollie and her mother had made a prudent choice. Am I not now <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Halibut’s god-sister, so to speak?</p>
			<p>The wedding, said Pollie, was to be in the summer. “And oh, miss”⁠—would I come?</p>
			<p>The scheming that followed! The sensitive draping of difficulties on either side, the old homesick longing on mine⁠—to flee away now, at once, from this scene of my afflicted adoration. I almost hated Fanny for giving me so much pain. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater was summoned to our council; my promise was given; and it was she who suggested that its being “a nice bright afternoon,” Pollie should take me for a walk.</p>
			<p>But whither? It seemed a sheer waste of Pollie to take her to the woods. Thoughts of <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s, the nocturnal splendour in the cab, a hunger for novelty, the itch to spend money, and maybe a tinge of daredevilry⁠—without a moment’s hesitation I chose the shops and the “town.” Once more in my black, with two thicknesses of veil canopying my head, as if I were a joint of meat in the Dog Days, I settled myself on Pollie’s arm, and⁠—in the full publicity of three o’clock in the afternoon⁠—off we went.</p>
			<p>We chattered; we laughed; we sniggled together like schoolgirls in amusement at the passersby, in the strange, busy High Street. I devoured the entrancing wares in the shop windows⁠—milliner, hairdresser and perfumer, confectioner; even the pyramids of jam jars and sugar-cones in the grocer’s, and the soaps, syrups, and sponges of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Simpkins⁠—Beechwood’s pharmaceutical chemist. Out of the sovereign which I had brought with me from my treasure-chest Pollie made purchases on my behalf. For <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, a muslin tie for the neck; for herself⁠—after heated controversy⁠—a pair of kid gloves and a bottle of frangipani; and for me a novel.</p>
			<p>This last necessitated a visit to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stocks’s Circulating Library. My hopes had been set on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Jane Eyre</i>. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stocks regretted that the demand for this novel had always exceeded her supply: “What may be called the sensational style of fiction” (or was it friction?) “never lays much on our hands.” She produced, instead, and very tactfully, a comparatively diminutive copy of Miss Austen’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sense and Sensibility</i>. It was a little shop-soiled; “But books keep, miss”; and she let me have it at a reduced price. Her great shears severed the string. Pollie and I once more set clanging the sonorous bell at the door, and emerged into the sunlight. “Oh, Pollie,” I whispered, “if only you could stay with me forever!”</p>
			<p>This taste of “life” had so elated me that after fevered and silent debate I at last laughed out, and explained to Pollie that I wished to be “put down.” Her breathless arguments against this foolhardy experiment only increased my obstinacy. She was compelled to obey. Bidding her keep some little distance behind me, I settled my veil, clasped tight my Miss Austen in my arms and set my face in the direction from which we had come. One after another the wide paving-stones stretched out in front of me. It was an extraordinary experience. I was openly alone now, not with the skulking, deceitful shades and appearances of night, or the quiet flowers and trees in the enormous vacancy of nature; but in the midst of a town of men in their height⁠—and walking along there: by myself. It was as if I had suddenly realized what astonishingly active and domineering and multitudinous creatures we humans are. I can’t explain. The High Street, to use a good old phrase, “got up into my head.” My mind was in such a whirl of excitement that full consciousness of what followed eludes me.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The sun poured wintry bright into the house-walled gulf of a street that in my isolation seemed immeasurably vast and empty. I think my senses distorted the scene. There was the terrific glitter of glass, the clatter of traffic. A puff of wind whirled dust and grit and particles of straw into the air. The shapes of advancing pedestrians towered close above me, then, stiff with sudden attention, passed me by. My legs grew a little numb and my brain confused. The strident whistling of a butcher’s boy, with an empty, bloodstained tray over his shoulder, suddenly ceased. Saucer-eyed, he stood stock still, gulped and gaped. I kept on my course. A yelp of astonishment rent the air. Whereupon, as it seemed, from diverse angles, similar boys seemed to leap out of the ground and came whooping and revolving across the street in my direction. And now the blood so hummed in my head that it was rather my nerves than my ears which informed me of a steadily increasing murmur and trampling behind me.</p>
			<p>With extraordinary vividness I recall the vision of a gigantic barouche gliding along towards me in the shine and the dust; and seated up in it a high, pompous lady who at one moment with rigid urbanity inclined her head apparently in my direction, and at the next, her face displeased as if at an offensive odour, had sunk back into her cushions, oblivious not only of Beechwood but of the whole habitable globe. Simultaneously, I was aware, even as I hastened on, first that the acquaintance whose salute she had acknowledged was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble, and next, that with incredible rapidity he had wheeled himself about and had instantaneously transfixed his entire attention on some object in the window of a hatter’s.</p>
			<p>Until this moment, as I say, a confused but blackening elation had filled my mind. But at sight of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble’s rook-like stooping shoulders I began to be afraid. My shoe stumbled against a jutting paving-stone. I almost fell. Whereupon the mute concourse at my heels⁠—spreading tail of me, the comet⁠—burst into a prolonged squealing roar of delight. The next moment Pollie was at my side, stooping to my rescue. It was too late. One glance over my shoulder⁠—and terror and hatred of the whole human race engulfed me like a sea. I struck savagely at Pollie’s cotton-gloved hand. Shivering, with clenched, sticky teeth, I began to run.</p>
			<p>Why this panic? Who would have harmed me? And yet on the thronging faces which I had flyingly caught sight of through my veil there lay an expression that was not solely curiosity⁠—a kind of hunger, a doglike gleam. I remember one thin-legged, ferrety, red-haired lad in particular. Well, no matter. The comedy was brief, and it was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stocks who lowered the curtain. Attracted by all this racket and hubbub in the street, she was protruding her round head out of her precincts. Like fox to its hole, I scrambled over her wooden doorstep, whisked round her person, and fled for sanctuary into her shop. She hustled poor Pollie in after me, wheeled round on my pursuers, slammed the door in their faces, slipped its bolt, and drew down its dark blue blind.</p>
			<p>In the sudden quiet and torpor of this musty gloom I turned my hunted eyes and stared at the dark strip of holland that hid me from my pursuers. So too did <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stocks. The round creature stood like a stone out of reach of the surf. Then she snorted.</p>
			<p>“Them!” said she, with a flick of her duster. “A parcel of idle herrand boys. <em>I</em> know them: and no more decency than if you was Royalty, my dear, or a pickpocket, or a corpse run over in the street. You rest a bit, pore young thing, and compose yourself. They’ll soon grow tired of themselves.”</p>
			<p>She retired into the back part of her shop beyond the muslined door and returned with a tumbler of water. I shook my head. My sight pulsed with my heartbeats. As if congealed into a drop of poison, I stared and stared at the blind.</p>
			<p>“Open the door,” I said. “I’d like to go out again.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, miss! oh, miss!” cried Pollie.</p>
			<p>But <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stocks was of a more practical turn. After surveying my enemies from an upper window she had sent a neighbour’s little girl for a cab. By the time this vehicle arrived, with a halfhearted “Boo!” of disappointment, the concourse in the street had all but melted away, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stocks’s check duster scattered the rest. The cab-door slammed, the wheels ground on the kerbstone, my début was over. I had been but a nine minutes’ wonder.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
