<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-6" id="chapter-44" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</h3>
			<p>Thus then I came of age, though not on <abbr>St.</abbr> Rosa’s day. However dramatic and memorable, I grant it was not a courteous method of acknowledging Lord Chiltern’s courtesy. In the good old days the drunken dwarf would have been jovially tossed from hand to hand. From mind to mind was my much milder penalty. And yet this poor little contretemps was of a sort that required “hushing up”; so it kept tongues wagging for many a day. It was little comfort that Percy shared my disgrace, and even Susan, for “giving way.”</p>
			<p>She it was who had lifted my body from the table and carried it up into darkness and quiet. In the half light of my bedroom I remember I opened my eyes for a moment⁠—eyes which refused to stay still in their sockets, but were yet capable of noticing that the left hand which clasped mine had lost its ring. I tried to point it out to her. She was crying.</p>
			<p>Philippina sober was awakened the next morning by the fingers of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie herself. She must have withdrawn the kindly sheet from my face, and, with nightmare still babbling on my lips, I looked up into the familiar features, a little grey and anxious, but creased up into every appearance of goodwill.</p>
			<p>“Not so excessively unwisely, then,” she rallied me, “and only the least little thought too well. We have been quite anxious about Bébé, haven’t we, Fleming?”</p>
			<p>“Quite, madam. A little indigestion, that’s all.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes; a little indigestion, that’s all,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie agreed: “and I am sure Poppet doesn’t want those tiresome doctors with their horrid physic.”</p>
			<p>I sat up, blinking from one to the other. “I think it was the green stuff,” I muttered, tongue and throat as dry as paper. I could scarcely see out of my eyes for the racking stabs of pain beneath my skull.</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes,” was the soothing response. “But you mustn’t agitate yourself, silly child. Don’t open your eyes like that. The heat of the room, the excitement, some little obstinate dainty. Now, one of those darling little pills, and a cooling draught, perhaps. Thank you, Fleming.”</p>
			<p>The door closed, we were left alone. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s scrutiny drifted away. Their shutters all but closed down on the black-brown pupils. My head pined for its pillows, my shoulders for some vestige of defence, but pined in vain. For the first time I felt afraid of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie. She was thinking so densely and heavily.</p>
			<p>Yet, as if out of a cloud of pure absentmindedness, dropped softly her next remark. “Does pretty Pusskin remember what she <em>said</em> to Miss Bowater?⁠ ⁠… No?⁠ ⁠… Well, then, if she can’t, it’s quite certain nobody else can⁠—or wishes to. I inquired merely because the poor thing, who has been really nobly devoting herself to her duties, seems so hurt. Well, it shall be a little lesson⁠—to us all. Though one swallow does not make a summer, my child, one hornet can make things extremely unpleasant. Not that I⁠—” A vast shrug of the shoulders completed the sentence. “A little talk and tact will soon set <em>that</em> right; and I am perfectly satisfied, perfectly satisfied with things as they are. So that’s settled. Some day you must tell me a little more about your family history. Meanwhile, rest and quiet. No more excitement, no more company, and no more”⁠—she bent low over me with wagging head⁠—“no more <em>green stuff</em>. And then”⁠—her eyes rested on me with a peculiar zest rather than with any actual animosity⁠—“then we must see what can be done for you.”</p>
			<p>There came a tap⁠—and Percy showed in the doorway.</p>
			<p>“I thought, Aunt Alice, I thought⁠—” he began, but at sight of the morose, heavy countenance lifted up to him, he shut his mouth.</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, “thank you, Sir Galahad; you did nothing of the kind.”</p>
			<p>Whereupon her nephew wheeled himself out of the room so swiftly that I could not detect what kind of exotics he was carrying in a little posy in his hand.</p>
			<p>So the invalid, now a burden on the mind of her caretaker many times her own weight, was exiled forever from <abbr>No.</abbr> 2. Poor Fleming, sniffier and more disgusted than ever, was deputed to carry me off to the smaller of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s country retreats, a long, low-roofed, shallow-staired house lying in the green under the downs at Croomham. There I was to vegetate for a time and repent of my sins.</p>
			<p>Percy’s fiery syrup took longer to withdraw its sweet influences than might have been foreseen. Indeed, whenever I think of him, its effects are faintly renewed, though not, I trust, to the detriment of my style! None too strong physically, the Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> that sat up at her latticed window at Monk’s House during those few last interminable August days, was very busy with her thoughts. As she looked down for hours together on the gnarled, thick-leafed old mulberry-tree in the corner of the lawn that swept up to the very stones of the house, and on the walled, sun-drugged garden beyond, she was forever debating that old, old problem; what could be done <em>by</em> herself <em>with</em> herself?</p>
			<p>The doves crooned; the cawing rooks flapped black into the blue above the neighbouring woods; the earth drowsed on. It was a scene of peace and decay. But I seemed to have lost the charm that could have made it mine. I was an Ishmael. And worse⁠—I was still a prisoner. No criminal at death’s door can have brooded more laboriously on his chances of escape. No wonder the voices of childhood had whispered, Away!</p>
			<p>There came a long night of rain. I lay listening to the whisper and clucking of its waters. Far away the lapwings called: <i>Ee-ooeet! Ee-ooeet!</i> What follies I had been guilty of. How wilily circumstance had connived at them. Yet I was no true penitent. My heart was empty, so parched up that neither love nor remorse had any place in it. Revenge seemed far sweeter. Driven into this corner, I sent a desperate word to Sir <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> It remained unanswered, and this friend followed the rest into the wilderness of my ingratitude.</p>
			<p>But that brought me no relief. For of all the sins I have ever committed, envy and hatred seem to me the most unpleasant to practise. I was to learn also that “he who sows hatred shall gather rue,” and “bed with thistles.” With eyes at last as anxious as Jezebel’s, I resumed my watch at the window. But even if Percy had ridden from London solely to order Fleming to throw me down, she would not have “demeaned” herself to set hands on me. She might be bold, but she, too, was fastidious.</p>
			<p>Then Fleming herself one afternoon softly and suddenly vanished away⁠—on her summer’s holiday. Poor thing; so acute was the chronic indigestion caused by <em>her</em> obstinate little dainty that she did not even bid me goodbye.</p>
			<p>She left me in charge of the housekeeper, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> French, a stout, flushed, horse-faced woman, who now and then came in and bawled good-humouredly at me as if I were deaf, but otherwise ignored me altogether. I now spent most of my time in the garden, listlessly wandering out of sight of the windows (and gardeners), along its lank-flowered, rose-petalled walks, hating its beauty. Or I would sit where I could hear the water-drops in a well. The very thought of company was detestable. I sat there half-dead, without book or needle, with scarcely a thought in my head. In my library days at <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 I had become a perfect slave to pleasures of the intellect. But now dyspepsia had set in there too.</p>
			<p>My nights were pestered with dreams and my days with their vanishing spectres; and I had no Pollie to tell me what they forecast. I suppose one must be more miserable and hunted in mind even than I was, <em>never</em> to be a little sentimental when alone. I would lean over the cold mouth of the well, just able to discern in the cold mirror of water, far beneath, the face I was almost astonished to find reflected there. “Shall I come too?” I would morbidly whisper, and dart away.</p>
			<p>Still, just as with a weed in winter, life was beginning to renew the sap within me; and Monk’s House was not only drowsy with age but gentle with whispers. Once at least in every twenty-four hours I would make a pilgrimage to its wrought-iron gates beside the square white lodge, to gloat out between the metal floriations at the dusty country lane beyond⁠—with its swallows and wagtails and dragonflies beneath the heat-parched tranquil elms. A slim, stilted greyhound on one such visit stalked out from the lodge. Quite unaware of his company, I turned about suddenly and stared clean down his arched throat⁠—white teeth and lolling tongue. It was as if I had glanced into the jaws of destiny. He turned his head, whiningly yawned, and stalked back into the shade.</p>
			<p>A day or two afterwards I made the acquaintance of the lodge-keeper’s daughter, a child named Rose, about five years of age, with a mop of copper-coloured curls bound up with a pale blue bow. At first glimpse of me she had hopped back as if on springs into the house. A moment after, her white-aproned mother appeared in the porch, and with a pleasant nod at me bade the child smile at the pretty little lady. Finger in mouth, Rose wriggled and stared. In a few days she grew accustomed to my small figure. And though I would sometimes discover her saucer-blue eyes fixed on me with a peculiar intensity, we almost came to be friends. She was not a very bright little girl; yet I found myself wooing her with all the arts I knew⁠—in a scarcely conscious attempt, I suppose, to creep back by this small lane into the world’s and my own esteem.</p>
			<p>I made her wristlets of little flowers, hacked her out cockle boats from the acorns, told her half-forgotten stories, and once had to trespass into the kitchen at the back of the lodge to tell her mother that she was fallen asleep. Was it mere fancy that read in the scared face she twisted round on the pretty little lady from over her saucepan, “Avaunt, Evil Eye!”? I had become abominably self-conscious.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
