<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h2>
			<p>My landlady was already awaiting me at the place appointed, and we walked off together towards the house. It had been a prudent arrangement, for we met and passed at least half a dozen strangers before we arrived there, and one and all by the unfeigned astonishment with which they turned to watch our two figures out of sight (for I stooped once or twice, as if to tie my shoelace, in order to see), clearly proved themselves to belong to that type of humanity to which my new acquaintance had referred frigidly as <b>they</b>. Vanity of vanities, when one old loitering gentleman did not so much as lift an eyelid at me⁠—he was so absorbed in own thoughts⁠—I felt a pang of annoyance.</p>
			<p>As soon as I was safely installed in my own room again, I confided in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater a full account of my morning’s adventure. Not so much because I wished to keep free of any further deceit, as because I simply couldn’t contain myself, and must talk of my Stranger. She heard me to the end without question, but with an unusual rigidity of features. She compressed her lips even tighter before beginning her catechism.</p>
			<p>“What was the young man’s name,” she inquired; “and where did he live?”</p>
			<p>My hope had been that she herself would be able to supply these little particulars. With a blank face, I shook my head: “We just talked of things in general.”</p>
			<p>“I see,” she said, and glanced at me, as if over her spectacles. Her next question was even less manageable. “Was the young fellow a gentleman?”</p>
			<p>Alas! she had fastened on a flaw in my education. This was a problem absolutely new to me. I thought of my father, of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waggett, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Grose, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Phelps, the old farmer in the railway train, of Sir Walter Pollacke, my bishop, Heathcliff, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowater, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clodd, even Henry⁠—or rather all these male phantoms went whisking across the back of my mind, calling up every other two-legged creature of the same gender within sight or hearing. Meanwhile, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater stood like Patience on her Brussels carpet, or rather like Thomas de Torquemada, watching these intellectual contortions.</p>
			<p>“Well, really, do you know, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater,” I was forced to acknowledge at last, with a sigh and a smile, “I simply can’t say. I didn’t think of it. That seems rather on <i>his</i> side, doesn’t it? But to be quite, quite candid, perhaps <i>not</i> a gentleman; not <i>exactly</i>, I mean.”</p>
			<p>“Which is no more than I supposed,” was her comment, “and if <i>not</i>⁠—and any kind of not, miss⁠—what was he, then? And <i>if</i> not, why, you can never go there again!”</p>
			<p>“Indeed, but I must,” I said, as if to myself.</p>
			<p>“With your small knowledge of the world,” she retorted unmovedly, “you must, if you please, be guided by those with more. Who isn’t a gentleman couldn’t be desirable company if chanced on like a stranger in a young lady’s lonely rambles. And <i>how</i> tall did you say? And what’s more,” she continued, not pausing for an answer, and gathering momentum on her way, “if he <i>is</i> a gentleman, I’d better come along with you, miss, and see for myself.”</p>
			<p>A rebellious and horrified glance followed her retreating figure out of the room. So this was the reward for being open and aboveboard. What a ridiculous figure I should cut, tippeting along behind my landlady. What would my stranger think of me? What would she think of him? <i>Was</i> he a “gentleman”? To decide whether or not the Spirit of Man is an evil spirit had been an easy problem by comparison. <i>Gentle man</i>⁠—why, of course, self muttered in shame to self convicted of yet another mean little snobbery. He had been almost absurdly gentle⁠—had treated me as if I were an angel rather than a young woman.</p>
			<p>But the nettlerash produced by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s bigotry was not to be so easily allayed as all that. It had invited yet another kind of <b>them</b> in. An old, green, rotting board hung over the wicket gate that led up the stony path into Wanderslore⁠—“Trespassers will be prosecuted.” Why couldn’t one put boards up in the Wanderslore of one’s mind? My landlady had never inquired if Lady Pollacke was a gentlewoman. How mechanical things were in their unexpectedness. That morning I had gone out to free myself from the Crimble tangle, merely to return with a few more knots in the skein.</p>
			<p>A dead calm descended on me. I was adrift in the Sargasso Sea⁠—in the Doldrums, and had dropped my sextant overboard. Even a long stare at the master-mariner on the wall gave me no help. Yet I must confess that these foolish reflections made me happy. I would share them with Fanny⁠—perhaps with the “gentleman” himself, some day. I leaned over the side of my small vessel, more deeply interested in the voyage than I had been since Pollie had carried me out of my girlhood into the Waggetts’ wagonette. And as I sat there, simmering over these novelties, a voice, clear as a cockcrow, exclaimed in my mind, “If father hadn’t died, I’d have had nothing of all this.” My hands clenched damp in my lap at this monstrosity. But I kept my wits and managed to face it. “If father hadn’t died,” I answered myself, “you don’t know <i>what</i> would have happened. And if you think that, because I am happy now, anything could make me <i>not</i> wish him back, it’s a lie.” But I remained a little less comfortable in mind.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The evening post brought me a letter and a registered parcel. I turned them over and over, examining the unfamiliar handwriting, the bright red seals; but all in vain. In spite of my hard-won knotlore, I was still kneeling over the package and wrestling with string and wax, when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, folding <i>her</i> letter away in its envelope, announced baldly: “She’s not coming home, it seems, at all these holidays, having been invited by some school friend into the country⁠—Merriden, or some such place. Not that you might expect Fanny to write plain, when she doesn’t <i>mean</i> plain.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater! Not at all?”</p>
			<p>Cold fogs of disappointment swept in, blotting out my fool’s paradise. That inward light without which life is dark indeed died in eclipse. The one thought and desire which I now realized I had been feeding on from hour to hour, had been snatched away. To think that they had been nothing but waste. “Oh, Fanny,” I whispered bitterly to myself, “oh, Fanny!” But the face I lifted to her mother showed only defiance.</p>
			<p>“Well,” I muttered, “who cares? Let’s hope she will enjoy herself better than mooning about in this dingy old place.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater merely continued to look quietly over the envelope at me.</p>
			<p>“Oh, but you know, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater,” I quaked miserably, “it’s not dingy to <i>me</i>. Surely a promise is a promise, whoever you make it to!”</p>
			<p>With that I stooped my face over the stuffy-smelling brown paper, and attacked the last knot with my teeth. With eyes still a little asquint with resentment I smoothed away the wrappings from the shape within. Then every thought evaporated in a sigh. For there, of a delicate veined fairness against the white paper, lay a minute copy in ivory of none but lovely Hypnos. Half-blindly I stared at it⁠—lost in a serenity beyond all hope of my poor, foolish life⁠—then lifted it with both hands away from my face: “A present⁠—to me! Look!” I cried, “look!”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater settled her face over the image as if it had been some tropical and noxious insect I was offering for her inspection. But I thrust it into her hand and opened my letter:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<b epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Dear Young Lady</b>⁠—I am no poet, and therefore cannot hope to share with you the music of ‘the flaming drake,’ but we did share my Hypnos. Only a replica, as I told you, but none the less one of the most beautiful things I possess. Will you, then, give me the pleasure of accepting the contents of the little package I am having posted with this⁠—as a small token of the delight your enthusiasm gave Yours most sincerely⁠—</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">“Walter Pollacke.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">“<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.S.</abbr>⁠—Lady Pollacke tells me that we may perhaps again look forward to your company to tea in a few days, please do not think, then, of acknowledging this little message by post.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>But I did acknowledge it, not with that guardedness of the feelings which Miss Austen seemed to recommend, but from the very depths of my heart. Next morning came Lady Pollacke’s invitation:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<b epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr></b>⁠—I hasten to renew my invitation of last Thursday. Will you give us the pleasure of your company at tea on Friday afternoon? <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie⁠—the younger daughter, as you will remember, of Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr>⁠—has expressed an exceedingly warm wish to make your acquaintance, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pellew, who is giving us a course of sermons at <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s during Holy Week, will also be with us. May we, perhaps, share yet another of those <i>delightful</i> recitations?</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Believe me,<br/>
					“Yours sincerely,<br/>
					“<b epub:type="z3998:signature">Lydia Preston Pollacke</b>.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I searched my memory for memorial of Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr>; alas, in vain. This lapse made the thought of meeting his younger daughter a little alarming. Yet I must confess to having been pleasantly flattered by these attentions. Even the black draught administered by Fanny, who had not even thought it worth her while to send me a word of excuse or explanation, lost much of its bitterness. I asked <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater if she supposed I might make Sir Walter a little present in return for his. Would it be a proper thing to do, would it be <i>lady</i>like?</p>
			<p>“What’s meant kindly,” she assured me, after a moment’s reflection, “even if taken amiss, which, to judge from his letter, it won’t be, is nothing to be thought of but only <i>felt</i>.”</p>
			<p>This advice decided me, and early on my Friday morning I trimmed and freshened up as well as I could one of my grandfather’s dwarf cedar-trees which, in the old days, had stood on my window balcony. Its branches were now a little dishevelled, but it was still a fresh and pretty thing in its grey-green pot.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
