<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-37" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
			<p>Time and circumstance have strangely divided me from the Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> of those days. I look back on her, not with shame, but with a shrug of my shoulders, a sort of incredulous tolerance⁠—almost as if she too were a stranger. Perhaps a few years hence I shall be looking back with an equal detachment on the Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> seated here at this moment with her books and her pen in the solitude of her thoughts, vainly endeavouring to fret out and spin together mere memories that nobody will ever have the patience to read. Shall I then be able to tell myself what I want now, give words to the vague desires that still haunt me? Shall I still be waiting on for some unconceived eventuality?</p>
			<p>There is, too, another small riddle of a different kind, which I cannot answer. In memory and imagination, as I steadily gaze out of this familiar room recalling the past, I am that very self in that distant garden of Wanderslore. But even as I look, I am not only <em>within</em> myself there, but also outside of myself. I seem, I mean, actually to be contemplating, as if with my own eyes, those two queer, silent figures returning through the drowsying, moth-haunted flowers and grasses to the black, vigilant woman awaiting them beside the garden house. “Alas, you poor, blind thing,” I seem, like a ghost, to warn the one small creature, “have a care; seize your happiness; it is vanishing!”</p>
			<p>All that I write, then, is an attempt only to tell, not to explain. I realize that sometimes I was pretending things, yet did not know that I was pretending; that often I acted with no more conscience or consciousness, maybe, than has a carrion crow that picks out the eyes of a lamb, or a flower that draws in its petals at noon. Yet I know⁠—know absolutely, that I was, and am, responsible not only for myself, but for everything. For my whole world. And I cannot explain this either. At times, as if to free myself, I had to stare at what appalled me. I am sure, for instance, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie never dreamed that her mention of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Crimble sent me off in fancy at the first opportunity to that woeful outhouse in his mother’s garden to look in on him there⁠—again. But I did so look at him, and was a little more at peace with him after that. Why, then, cannot I be at peace with one who loved me?</p>
			<p>Maybe if I could have foreseen how I was to come to Wanderslore again, I should have been a less selfish, showy, and capricious companion to him that June evening. But I was soon lapped back into my life in London; and thought only of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Anon, as I am apt to think of God: namely, when I needed his presence and his help. As a matter of fact, I had small time to think. Even the doubts and misgivings that occasionally woke me in the night melted like dreams in the morning. Every morrow blotted out its yesterday⁠—as faded flowers are flung away out of a vase.</p>
			<p>In that vortex of visits and visitors, that endless vista of amusements and eating and drinking⁠—some hidden spring of life in me began to fail. What a little self-conscious affected donkey I became, shrilly hee-hawing away; the centre of a simpering throng plying me with flattery. What airs I put on.</p>
			<p>If this Life of mine had been a Biography, the author of it would have had the satisfaction of copying out from a pygmy blue morocco diary the names of all the celebrated and distinguished people I met at <abbr>No.</abbr> 2. A few of them underlined in red! The amusing thing is that, like my father, I was still a Radical at heart and preferred low life⁠—fleabane and chickweed⁠—to the fine flowers of culture; which only means, of course, that in this I am a snob inside out. Nevertheless, the attention I had shunned I now began to covet, and, like a famous artist or dancer, would go sulky to bed, if I had been left to blush at being unseen. I forced myself to be more and more fastidious: and tried to admire as little as possible. I would even imitate and affect languid pretentiousnesses and effronteries; and learned to be downright rude to people in a cultivated way. As for small talk, I soon accumulated a repertory of that, and could use the fashionable slang and current “conversations” like a native. All this intensely amused <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie. For, of course, the more like the general run of these high livers I was, the more conspicuous I became.</p>
			<p>The truth is, the Lioness’s head was in peril of being turned, and, like a blind kitten in a bucket of water, I came very near to being drowned in the social cream-bowl. For what little I gained in public by all this silly vanity I paid a heavy price when alone. I began to be fretful and utterly useless to myself⁠—just lived on from excitement to excitement. And Fleming soon had better reasons for detesting me than merely because I was horribly undersized.</p>
			<p>Perhaps I am exaggerating; but the truth is I find it extremely difficult to keep patience with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s pampered protégée. She was weak and stupid. Yet learning had not lost its charm. My mind persisted in being hungry, however much satiated were my senses and fine feelings. I even infected Susan with my enthusiasm for indigestible knowledge. For since <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie had begun to find my passion for shells, fossils, flints, butterflies, and stuffed animals a little wearisome, it was her niece who now accompanied me to my many Meccas in her stead. By a happy chance we often met on these pilgrimages the dark, straight-nosed young man whom I had looked down upon at my first ballet, and who also apparently was a fanatic.</p>
			<p>However deeply engrossed in mementoes of the Dark or Stone Ages he might be, he never failed to see us the moment we entered his echoing gallery. He would lift his eyebrows; his monocle would drop out; and he would come sauntering over to meet us, looking as fresh as apples cold with dew. I liked Captain Valentine. So much so that I sent an almost rapturous description of him to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Anon.</p>
			<p>He did not seem in the least to mind being seen in my company. We had our little private jokes together. We both enjoyed the company of Susan. He was so crisp and easy and quick-witted, and yet⁠—to my unpractised eye⁠—looked delightfully domesticatable. Even the crustiest old caretaker, at a word and a smile from Captain Valentine, would allow me to seat myself on the glass cases. So I could gloat on their contents at leisure. And certainly of the three of us I was by far the most diligent student.</p>
			<p>Long hours, too, of the none too many which will make up my life would melt away like snow in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s library. A button specially fixed for me in the wainscot would summon a manservant. Having ranged round the lofty walls, I would point up at what books I wanted. They would be strewn around me on the floor⁠—gilded and leathery volumes, some of them almost of my own height, and many times my weight. I would open the lid, turn the great pages, and carefully sprawling on my elbows between them, would pore for hours together on their coloured pictures of birds and flowers, gems and glass, ruins, palaces, mountains⁠—hunting, cockfighting, fashions, fine ladies, and foreign marvels. And I dipped into novels so like the unpleasanter parts of my own life that they might just as well have been autobiographies.</p>
			<p>The secret charm of all this was that I was alone; and while I was reading I ceased to worry. I just drugged my mind with books. I would go rooting and rummaging in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s library, like a little pig after truffles. There was hardly a subject I left untasted⁠—old plays, and street ballads; Johnson’s enormous dictionary, that extraordinary book on Melancholy with its borage and hellebore and the hatted young man in love; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bel and the Dragon</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Newgate Calendar</i>. I even nibbled at Debrett⁠—and clean through all its “M’s.” The more I read, the more ignorant I seemed to become; and quite apart from this smattering jumble of knowledge, I pushed my way through memoirs and romances at the very sight of which my poor godmother would have fainted dead off.</p>
			<p>They may have been harmful; but I certainly can’t say that I regret having read them⁠—which may be part of the harm. You could tell the really bad ones almost at a sniff. They had bad smells, like a beetle cupboard or a scented old man. I read on of witchcraft and devils, yet hated the cloud they cast over me⁠—like some horrible treacle in the mind. But as for the authors who just reasoned about Time and God and Miracles, and so on, I poked about in them willingly enough; but my imagination went off the other way⁠—with my heart in its pocket. Possibly without knowing it. But I do know this: that never to my dying day shall I learn what a common-sized person with a pen or a pencil, can <em>not</em> make shocking, or be shocked at. It seemed to me that to some of these authors the whole universe was nothing better than a squid, and a very much scandalized young woman would attempt to replace their works on the shelves.</p>
			<p>When in good faith I occasionally ventured to share (or possibly to show off) some curious scrap of information with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie, I thought her eyes would goggle out of her head. It was perhaps my old <em>mole</em> habit that prevented me from dividing things up into the mentionable and unmentionable. Possibly I carried this habit to excess; and yet, of course, remained the slave of my own small pruderies. Still, I don’t think it was either <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s or Percy’s pruderies that I had to be careful about. To make <em>him</em> laugh was one of the most hateful of my experiences at <abbr>No.</abbr> 2.</p>
			<p>I have read somewhere that the human instincts are “unlike Apollyon, since they always degrade themselves by their disguises. They dress themselves up as apes and mandrills; he as a ringed, supple, self-flattering, seductive serpent.” Possibly that has something to do with it. Or is it that my instincts are also on a petty scale? I don’t know. I hate and fear pain even more than most people, and have fought pretty hard in the cause of self-preservation. On the other hand, I haven’t the faintest wish in the world to “perpetuate my species.” Not that I might not have been happy in a husband and in my children. I suppose that kind of thing comes on one just as naturally as breathing. Nevertheless, I suspect I was born to be an old maid. Calling up spirits from the vasty deep has always seemed to me to be a far more dreadful mystery than Death. It is not, indeed, the ghosts of the dead and the past which I think should oppress the people I see around me, but those of the children to come. I thank God from the bottom of my heart for the happiness and misery of having been alive, but my small mind reels when I brood on what the gift of it implies.</p>
			<p>Well, well, well; of one burden at least I can absolve <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie⁠—that of making me so sententious. Somehow or other, but ever more sluggishly, those few crowded summer months of my twentieth year wore away. It is more of a mercy than a curse, I suppose, that Time never stands still.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile two events occurred which, for the time being, sobered and alarmed me. A few days before I had actually planned to pay a second visit to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s, the almost incredible news reached me that she was sailing for South America. It would hardly have surprised me more to hear that she was sailing for Sirius. She came to bid me goodbye. It was <em><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr></em> Bowater, she told me. She had been too confident of the “good nursing.” Far from mending in this world, his leg threatened “to carry him off into the next.” At these tidings Shame thrust out a very ugly head at me from her retreat. I had utterly forgotten the anxiety my poor old friend was in.</p>
			<p>She put on her spectacles with trembling fingers, and pushed her husband’s letter across to me. The handwriting was bold and thick, yet I fancied it looked a little weak in the loops:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<b epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Emily</b>⁠—The leg’s giving me the devil in this hole of a place. It looks as if I shouldn’t get through with it. I should be greatly obliged if you would come out to me. They’ll give you all the necessary information at the shipping office. Ask for Pullen. My love to Fanny. What’s she looking like now? I should like to see her before I go; but better say nothing about it. You’ve got about a month or three weeks, I should think; if that.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“I remain, your <abbr>affec.</abbr> husband,<br/>
					“<b epub:type="z3998:signature">Joseph Bowater</b>.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Easy enough in <em>appearance</em>,” was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s comment, as she folded up this stained and flimsy letter again, and stuffed it into her purse, “but it’s past even <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bowater to control what can be read between the lines.”</p>
			<p>She looked at me dumbly; the skin seemed to hang more loosely on her face. In vain I tried to think of a comforting speech. The tune of “Eternal Father,” one of the hymns we used to sing on windy winter Sunday evenings together, had begun droning in my head. The thought, too, was worrying me, though I did not put it into words, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bowater, far rather than in Buenos Aires, would have preferred to find his last resting-place in Nero Deep or the Virgin’s Trough⁠—those enormous pits of blue in the oceans which I myself had so often gloated on in his Atlas. We were old friends now, he and I. He was Fanny’s father. The very ferocity of his look had become a secret understanding between us. And now⁠—at this very moment perhaps⁠—he was dying. The jaunty “<em>devil</em>” in his letter, I am afraid, affected me far more than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s troubled face or even her courage.</p>
			<p>Without a moment’s hesitation she had made up her mind to face the Atlantic’s thousands of miles of wind and water to join the husband she had told me had long been “worse than” dead. The very tone in which she uttered the word “steamer,” was even more lugubrious than the enormous, mocking hoot of a vessel that had once alarmed me out of the sea one still evening at Lyme Regis. It was a horrifying prospect, yet she just quietly said, “steamer,” and looked at me over her spectacles.</p>
			<p>While she was away, the little house on Beechwood Hill, “bought, thank God, with my own money,” was to be shut up, but it was mine if I cared to return to it, and would ask a neighbour of hers, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Chantry, for the key. It would be Fanny’s if anything “happened” to herself. So dismal was all this that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bowater seemed already lost to me, and <em>I</em> twice an orphan. We talked on together in low, cautious voices. After a single sharp, cold glance at my visitor, Fleming had left us to ourselves over an enormous silver teapot. I grew so nervous at last, watching <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s slow glances of disapproval at her surroundings; her hot, tired face; and listening to her long drawn sighs, that again and again I lost the thread of what she was saying, and could answer Yes, or No, only by instinct.</p>
			<p>What with an antiquated timetable, a mislaid railway ticket, and an impudent bus-conductor, her journey had been a trying experience. I discovered, too, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bowater disliked the West End. She had first knocked at <abbr>No.</abbr> 4 by mistake. Its butler had known nothing whatever at all about any Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bowater had been too considerate to specify my dimensions. She had then shared a few hot moments in the porch of <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 with a more fashionable visitor⁠—to neither’s satisfaction. A manservant had admitted her to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s marble halls and “barefaced” statuary, and had apparently thought the large parcel she carried in her arms should have been delivered in the area.</p>
			<p>She bore no resentment, though I myself felt a little uneasy. Life was like that, she seemed to imply, and she had been no party to it. There was no doubt a better world where things would be different⁠—it was extraordinary what a number of conflicting sentiments she could convey in a pause or a shut of her mouth. Black and erect, she sat glooming over that alien teapot, sipping <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s colourless China tea, firmly declining to grimace at its insipidity, until she had told me all there was to tell.</p>
			<p>At last, having gathered herself together, she exhorted me to write to that young <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Anon. “I see a fidelity one might almost say doglike, miss, on that face, apart, as I have reasons for supposing, from a sufficiency in his pocket. Though, the Lord knows, you are young yet and seemingly in no need of a home.”</p>
			<p>Parcel, reticule, umbrella⁠—she bent over me with closed eyes, and muttered shamefacedly that she had remembered me in her will, “and may God bless you, miss, I’m sure.”</p>
			<p>I clutched the gloved hand in a sudden helpless paroxysm of grief and foreboding. “Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, you forgive⁠—” I choked, and still no words would come.</p>
			<p>She was gone, past recall; and all the love and gratitude and remorse I had longed to express flooded up in me. Yet, stuck up there in my chair, my chief apprehension had been that Fleming might come in again, and cast yet another veiled, sneering glance at my visitor.</p>
			<p>Peering between the gilded balusters, I watched my old friend droop away stiffly down the mild, lustrous staircase, bow to the man who opened the door for her, and emerge into the sunny emptiness.</p>
			<p>Maybe the thought had drifted across her mind that I had indeed been dipped in the dye-pot. But now⁠—these many years afterwards⁠—there is no more risk of misunderstanding. It is eight o’clock; the light is fading. Chizzel Hill glows green. I hear her feebling step on the stairs. She will peer at me over spectacles that now always straddle her nose. I must put my pen and papers away; and I, too, have made my will.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
