<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
			<p>I stumbled off, feeling smaller and smaller as I went, more and more ridiculous and insignificant, as indeed I must have appeared; for distance can hardly lend enchantment to any view of <i>me</i>. Not one single look did I cast behind; but now that my feelings began to quiet down, I began also to think. And a pretty muddle of mind it was. What had enraged and embittered me so? If only I had remained calm. Was it that my pride, my vanity, had in some vague fashion been a punishment of him for Fanny’s unkindness to me?</p>
			<p>“But he stole, he <i>stole</i> my letter,” I said aloud, stamping my foot on a budding violet; and⁠—there was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater. Evidently she had been watching my approach, and now smiled benignly.</p>
			<p>“Why, you are quite out of breath, miss; and your cheeks!⁠ ⁠… I hope you haven’t been having words. A better-spoken young fellow than I had fancied; and I’m sure I ask his pardon for the ‘gentleman.’ ”</p>
			<p>“Ach,” I swept up at my beech-tree, now cautiously unsheathing its first green buds in the lower branches, “I think he must be light in his head.”</p>
			<p>“And that often comes,” replied <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, with undisguised <i>bonhomie</i>, “from being heavy at the heart. Why, miss, he may be a young nobleman in disguise. There’s unlikelier things even than that, to judge from that trash of Fanny’s. While, as for fish in the sea⁠—it’s sometimes wise to be contented with what we can catch.”</p>
			<p>Who had been talking to me about fish in the sea⁠—quite lately? I thought contemptuously of Pollie and the Dream Book. “I am sorry,” I replied, nose in air, “but I cannot follow the allusion.”</p>
			<p>The charge of vulgarity was the very last, I think, which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater would have lifted a finger to refute. My cheeks flamed hotter to know that she was quietly smiling up there. We walked on in silence.</p>
			<p>That night I could not sleep. I was afraid. Life was blackening my mind like the mould of a graveyard. I could think of nothing but one face, one voice⁠—that scorn and longing, thought and fantasy. What if he did love me a little? I might at least have been kind to him. Had I so many friends that I could afford to be harsh and ungrateful? How dreadfully ill he had looked when I scoffed at him. And now what might <i>not</i> have happened to him? I seemed lost to myself. No wonder Fanny.⁠ ⁠… My body grew cold at a thought; the palms of my hands began to ache.</p>
			<p>Half-stifled, I leapt out of bed, and without the least notion of what I was doing, hastily dressed myself, and fled out into the night. I must find him, talk to him, plead with him, before it was too late. And in the trickling starlight, pressed against my own gatepost⁠—there he was.</p>
			<p>“Oh,” I whispered at him in a fever of relief and shame and apprehensiveness, “what are you doing here? You must go away at once, at once. I forgive you. Yes, yes; I forgive you. But⁠—at once. Keep the letter for me till I come again.” His hand was wet with the dew. “Oh, and never say it again. Please, please, if you care for me the least bit in the world, never, never say what you did again.” I poured out the heedless words in the sweet-scented quiet of midnight. “Now⁠—now go”; I entreated. “And indeed, indeed I am your friend.”</p>
			<p>The dark eyes shone quietly close to mine. He sighed. He lifted my fingers, and put them to my breast again. He whispered unintelligible words between us, and was gone. No more stars for me that night. I slept sound until long after dawn.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Softly as thistledown the days floated into eternity; yet they were days of expectation and action. April was her fickle self; not so <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie. Her letter to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater must have been a marvel of tact. Apartments had been engaged for us at a little watering-place in Dorsetshire, called Lyme Regis. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater and I were to spend at least a fortnight there alone together, and after our return <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie herself was to pay me a visit, and see with her own eyes if her prescription had been successful. After that, perhaps, if I were so inclined, and my landlady agreed with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pellew that it would be good for me, I might spend a week or two with her in London. What a twist of the kaleidoscope. I had sown never a pinch of seed, yet here was everything laughing and blossoming around me, like the wilderness in Isaiah.</p>
			<p>Indeed my own looking-glass told me how wan and languishing a Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> was pining for change of scene and air. She rejoiced that Fanny was enjoying herself, rejoiced that she was going to enjoy herself too. I searched <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s library for views of the sea, but without much reward. So I read over <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowater’s Captain Maury⁠—on the winds and monsoons and tide-rips and hurricanes, freshened up my <i>Robinson Crusoe</i>, and dreamed of the Angels with the Vials. In the midst of my packing (and I spread it out for sheer amusement’s sake), <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble called again. He looked nervous, gloomy, and hollow-eyed.</p>
			<p>I was fast becoming a mistress in affairs of the sensibilities. Yet, when, kneeling over my open trunk, I heard him in the porch, I mimicked Fanny’s “Dash!” and wished to goodness he had postponed his visit until only echo could have answered his knock. It fretted me to be bothered with him. And now? What would I not give to be able to say I had done my best and utmost to help him when he wanted it? Here is a riddle I can find no answer to, however long I live: How is it that our eyes cannot foresee, our very hearts cannot forefeel, the future? And how should we act if that future were plain before us? Yet, even then, what could I have said to him to comfort him? Really and truly I had no candle with which to see into that dark mind.</p>
			<p>In actual fact my task was difficult and delicate enough. In spite of her vow not to write again, yet another letter had meanwhile come from Fanny. If <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble’s had afforded “a ray of hope,” this had shut it clean away. It was full of temporizings, wheedlings, evasions⁠—and brimming over with Fanny.</p>
			<p>It suggested, too, that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater must have misread the name of her holiday place. The half-legible printing of the postmark on the envelope⁠—fortunately I had intercepted the postman⁠—did not even begin with an <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> And no address was given within. I was to tell <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble that Fanny was over-tired and depressed by the term’s work, that she simply couldn’t set her “weary mind” to anything, and as for decisions:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“He seems to think only of himself. You couldn’t believe, Midgetina, what nonsense the man talks. He can’t <i>see</i> that all poor Fanny’s future is at stake, body and soul. Tell him if he <i>wants</i> her to smile, he must sit in patience on a pedestal, and smile too. One simply can’t trust the poor creature with cold, sober facts. His mother, now⁠—why, I could read it in your own polite little description of her at your Grand Reception⁠—she smiles and smiles. So did the Cheshire Cat.</p>
				<p>“ ‘But oh, dear Fanny, time and your own true self, God helping, would win her over.’ So writes <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name" class="eoc">H. C.</abbr> That’s candid enough, if you look into it; but it isn’t sense. Once hostile, old ladies are <i>not</i> won over. They don’t care much for mind in the young. Anyhow, one look at me was enough for her⁠—and it was followed by a sharp little peer at poor Harold! She guessed. So you see, my dear, even for youthful things, like you and me, time gathers roses a jolly sight faster than we can, and it would have to be the <i>fait accompli</i>, before a word is breathed to her. That is, if I could take a deep breath and say, Yes.</p>
				<p>“But I can’t. I ask you: Can you <i>see</i> Fanny Bowater a Right Reverendissima? No, nor can I. And not even gaiters or an apron here and now would settle the question off-hand. Why I confide all this in you (why, for that matter, it has all been confided in <i>me</i>), I know not. You want nothing, and if you did, you wouldn’t want it long. Now, would you? Perhaps that is the secret. But Fanny wants a good deal. She cannot even guess how much. So, while Miss Stebbings and Beechwood Hill for ever and ever would be hell before purgatory, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. C.</abbr> and <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s would be merely the same thing, with the fires <i>out</i>. And I am quite sure that, given a chance, heaven is our home.</p>
				<p>“Oh, Midgetina, I listen to all this; mumbling my heart like a dog a bone. What the devil has it got to do with <i>me</i>, I ask myself? Who set the infernal trap? If only I could stop thinking and mocking and find some one⁠—not ‘to love me’ (between ourselves, there are far too many of <i>them</i> already), but capable of making me love him. They say a woman can’t be driven. I disagree. She <i>can</i> be driven⁠—mad. And apart from that, though twenty men only succeed in giving me hydrophobia, one could persuade me to drink, if only his name was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Right, as mother succinctly puts it.</p>
				<p>“But first and last, I am having a real, if not a particularly sagacious, holiday, and can take care of myself. And next and last, play, I <i>beseech</i> you, the tiny good Samaritan between me and poor, plodding, blinded <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. C.</abbr>⁠—even if he does eventually have to go on to Jericho.</p>
				<p>“And I shall ever remain, your most affec.⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:signature">F.</abbr>”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>How all this baffled me. I tried, but dismally failed, to pour a trickle of wine and oil into <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble’s wounded heart, for his sake and for mine, not for Fanny’s, for I knew in myself that his “Jericho” was already within view.</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand her; I don’t understand her,” he kept repeating, crushing his soft hat in his small, square hands. “I cannot reach her; I am not in touch with her.”</p>
			<p>Out of the fount of my womanly wisdom I reminded him how young she was, how clever, and how much flattered.</p>
			<p>“You know, then, there are⁠—others?” he gulped, darkly meeting me.</p>
			<p>“That, surely, is what makes her so precious,” I falsely insinuated.</p>
			<p>He gazed at me, his eyes like an immense, empty shop-window. “That thought puts⁠—I can’t,” and he twisted his head on his shoulders as if shadows were around him; “I can’t bear to think of her and⁠—with⁠—<i>others</i>. It unbalances me. But how can you understand?⁠ ⁠… A sealed book. Last night I sat at my window. It was raining. I know not the hour: and Spring!” He clutched at his knees, stooping forward. “I repudiated myself, thrust myself out. Oh, believe me, we are not alone. And there and then I resolved to lay the whole matter before”⁠—his glance groped towards the door⁠—“before, in fact, her <i>mother</i>. She is a woman of sagacity, of proper feeling in her station, though how she came to be the mother of⁠—But that’s neither here nor there. We mustn’t probe. Probably she thinks⁠—but what use to consider it? One word to her⁠—and Fanny would be lost to me for ever.” For a moment it seemed his eyes closed on me. “How can I bring myself to speak of it?” a remote voice murmured from beneath them.</p>
			<p>I looked at the figure seated there in its long black coat; and far away in my mind whistled an ecstatic bird⁠—“The sea! the sea! You are going away⁠—out, out of all this.”</p>
			<p>So, too, was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble, if only I had known it. It was my weak and cowardly acquiescence in Fanny’s deceits that was speeding him on his dreadful journey. None the less, a wretched heartless impatience fretted me at being thus helplessly hemmed in by my fellow creatures. How clumsily they groped on. Why couldn’t they be happy in just living free from the clouds and trammels of each other and of themselves? The selfish helplessness of it all. It was, indeed, as though the strange fires which Fanny had burnt me in⁠—which any sudden thought of her could still fan into a flickering blaze⁠—had utterly died down. Whether or not, I was hardened; a poor little earthenware pot fresh from the furnace. And with what elixir was it brimmed.</p>
			<p>I rose from my chair, walked away from my visitor, and peered through my muslin curtains at the green and shine and blue. A nursemaid was lagging along with a sleeping infant⁠—its mild face to the sky⁠—in a perambulator. A faint drift of dandelions showed in the stretching meadow. Kent’s blue hems lay calm; my thoughts drew far away.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble,” I cried in a low voice: “is she <i>worth</i> all our care for her?”</p>
			<p>“ ‘Our’⁠—‘our’?” he expostulated.</p>
			<p>“Mine, then. When I gave her, just to be friends, because⁠—because I loved her, a little ivory box, nothing of any value, of course, but which I have loved and treasured since childhood, she left it without a thought. It’s in my wardrobe drawer⁠—shall I show it to you? I <i>say</i> it was nothing in itself; but what I mean is that she just makes use of me, and with far less generosity than⁠—than other people do. Her eyes, her voice, when she moves her hand, turns her head, looks back⁠—oh, I know! But,” and I turned on him in the light, “does it mean anything? Let us just help her all we can, and⁠—keep away.”</p>
			<p>It was a treachery past all forgiveness: I see that now. If only I had said, “Love on, love on: ask nothing.” But I did not say it. A contempt of all this slow folly was in my brain that afternoon. Why couldn’t the black cowering creature take himself off? What concern of mine was his sick, sheepish look? What particle of a fig did he care for Me? Had he lifted a little finger when I myself bitterly needed it? I seemed to be struggling in a net of hatred.</p>
			<p>He raised himself in his chair, his spectacles still fixed on me; as if some foul insect had erected its blunt head at him.</p>
			<p>“Then <i>you</i> are against her too,” he uttered, under his breath. “I might have known it, I might have known it. I am a lost man.”</p>
			<p>It was pitiful. “Lost fiddlesticks!” I snapped back at him, with bared teeth. “I wouldn’t⁠—I’ve never harmed a fly. Who, I should like to know, came to <i>my</i> help when⁠ ⁠… ?” But I choked down the words. Silence fell between us. The idiot clock chimed five. He turned his face away to conceal the aversion that had suddenly overwhelmed him at sight of me.</p>
			<p>“I see,” he said, in a hollow, low voice, with his old wooden, artificial dignity. “There’s nothing more to say. I can only thank you, and be gone. I had not realized. You misjudge her. You haven’t the⁠—How could it be expected? But there! thinking’s impossible.”</p>
			<p>How often had I seen my poor father in his last heavy days draw his hand across his eyes like that? Already my fickle mind was struggling to find words with which to retract, to explain away that venomous outbreak. But I let him go. The stooping, hatted figure hastened past my window; and I was never to see him again.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
