<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
			<p>And then⁠—well, life plays strange tricks. In a week or two London had swallowed me up. How many times, I wonder, had I tried in fancy to picture <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s town house. How romantic an edifice fancy had made of it. Impressive in its own fashion, it fell far short of these ignorant dreams. It was <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 of about forty, set side by side, their pillared porticoes fronting a prodigious square. Its only “garden,” chiefly the resort of cats, children, nursemaids, an old whiskered gentleman in a bath chair, and sparrows, was visible to every passerby through a spearheaded palisade of railings. Broad paving-stones skirted its areas, and over each descent of steps hung a bell-pull.</p>
			<p>On cloudless days the sun filled this square like a tank with a dry glare and heat in which even my salamanderish body sometimes gasped like a fish out of water. When rain fell out of the low, grey skies, and the scaling plane-trees hissed and the sparrows chirped, my spirits seemed to sink into my shoes. And fair or foul, London soot and dust were enemies alike to my eyes, my fingers, and my nose.</p>
			<p>Even my beloved cloud-burdened northwest wind was never quite free of smuts and grit; and when blew the east! But it must be remembered how ignorant and local I was. In my long carriage journey to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s through those miles and miles of grimed, huddling houses, those shops and hoardings and steeples, I had realized for the first time that its capital is not a part of <em>England</em>, only a sprawling human growth in it; and though I soon learned to respect it as <em>that</em>, I could never see without a sigh some skimpy weed struggling for life in its bricked-up crevices. It was nearly all dead, except for human beings, and that could not be said of Lyndsey, or even of Beechwood Hill.</p>
			<p>Maybe my imagination had already been prejudiced by a coloured drawing which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wagginhorne had sent me once for a Valentine when I was a child. It hangs up now in that child’s nursery for a memento that I have been nearly dead. In the midst of it on a hill, in gold and faded carmine, encircled with great five-pointed blue stars, and with green, grooved valleys radiating from its castellated towers, is a city⁠—<em>Hierusalem</em>. A city surmounted by a narrow wreathing pennon on which, inscribed in silver, are the words: “Who heareth the Voice of My Spirit? And how shall they who deceive themselves resort unto Me?”</p>
			<p>Scattered far and near about this central piece, and connected with it by thin lines like wandering paths radiating from its gates across mountain, valley, and forest, lie, like round web-like smudges, if seen at a distance, the other chief cities of the world, Rome, Venice, Constantinople, Paris, and the rest. London sprawls low in the left-hand corner. The strongest glass cannot exhaust the skill and ingenuity of the maker of this drawing (an artist who, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wagginhorne told me, was mad, poor thing⁠—a man in a frenzy distemper⁠—his very words). For when you peer close into this London, it takes the shape of a tusked, black, hairy boar, sprawling with hoofs outspread, fast asleep. And between them, and even actually diapering the carcass of the creature, is a perfect labyrinth of life⁠—a high crowned king and queen, honey-hiving bees, an old man with a beard as if in a swoon, robbers with swords, travellers with beasts and torches, inns, a cluster of sharp-coloured butterflies (of the same proportion) fluttering over what looks like a clot of dung, a winding river, ships, trees, tombs, wasted unburied bodies, a child issuing from an egg, a phoenix taking flight: and so on. There is no end to this poor man’s devices. The longer you look, the more strange things you discover. Yet at distance of a pace or two, his pig appears to fade into nothing but a cloudy-coloured cobweb⁠—one of the many around his bright-dyed <em>Hierusalem</em>.</p>
			<p>Now I cannot help wondering if this peculiar picture may not already have tinged a young mind with a curious horror of London; even though my aversion may have needed no artificial aid.</p>
			<p>Still I must not be ungrateful. These were vague impressions; and as an actual fact, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie had transported me into the very midst of the world of rank and fashion. Her <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 was now my home. The spaciousness, the unnatural solitude, the servants who never so much as glanced at me until after my back was turned, the hushed <em>opulency</em>, the formality! It was impossible to be just my everyday Miss <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> My feet never found themselves twirling me round before their mistress was aware of it. I all but gave up gossiping with myself as I went about my little self-services.</p>
			<p>Parochial creature that I was⁠—I missed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s “homeliness.” To have things out of proportion to my body was an old story. To that, needless to say, I was perfectly accustomed. But here things were at first out of all proportion to my taste and habits, a very different thing. It is, in fact, extremely difficult in retrospect to get side by side again with those new experiences⁠—with a self that was at one moment intoxicated and engrossed, and the next humiliated and desperately ill at ease, at the novelty of her surroundings.</p>
			<p>I had a maid, too, Fleming, with a pointed face and greenish eyes, who, unlike <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, did not snort, but sniffed at things. Whether I retired for the night or rose in the morning, it was always to the accompaniment of a half-audible sniff. And I was never perfectly certain whether that sniff was one of the mind, or of the body, or of both. I found it hard to learn to do <em>little</em> enough for myself. Fleming despised me⁠—at least so I felt⁠—even for emptying my washbasin, or folding my nightgown. Worse, I was never sure of being alone: she stole about so softly on her duties. And then the “company.”</p>
			<p>Not that the last black days at Beechwood were not even blacker for the change. At first I tried to think them quietly over, to ravel out my mistakes, and to get straight with my past. But I couldn’t in all that splendour. I had to spend much more time in bewaring of faux pas, and in growing accustomed to being a kind of tame, petted animal⁠—tame even to itself, I mean. So <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s went floating off into the past like a dingy little house on the edge of a muddy river. Amid that old horror and anxiety, even my dear Pollie’s wedding day had slipped by unheeded. How often my thoughts went back to her now. If only <em>she</em> could have been my Fleming.</p>
			<p>I tried to make amends for my forgetfulness⁠—even to the extent of pocketing my pride, and commissioning Fleming to purchase for me (out of the little stock of money left me by Fanny) a cradle, as a wedding present for Pollie, and a chest of tools for her husband. Oddly enough, she did not sniff at this request. Her green eyes almost sparkled. At the very word, wedding, she seemed to revive into a new woman. And Pollie completely forgave me:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<b epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr></b>⁠—We was mother and all very sorry and grieved you couldn’t come though it passed off very satisfactory. As for forgetting please don’t mention the word, Lyndsey have never been the same since the old house was empty. It all passed off very satisfactory though with such torrents of rain there was a great pool in the churchyard which made everybody in high spirits. And William and I can’t thank you enough for those beautiful gifts you have sent us. Will have been a carpenter since he was a boy but there’s things there miss he says he never heard on in his born days but will be extreamly useful when he comes to know what for. And Mother says it was just like your good kind heart to think of what you sent me. You can’t think how handsome it looks in the new-papered room and I’m sure I hope if I may say so it may be quite as useful as Will’s tools, and its being pretty late to marry it isn’t as if I was a slip of a girl. And of course I have mother. Though if any does come you may be sure it will be a Sunday treat being too fine for ordinary.</p>
				<p>“Please God miss I hope you are keeping well and happy in your new suroundings and that dream will come true. It was a dreadful moment that day by the shops but I’m thankful all came well. If you ever writes to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> I trust you will mention me to her kindly not being much of a letter writer. If you could have heard the things she said of you your ears would burn miss you were such a treasure and to judge from her appearance she must have seen her troubles. And being a married woman helps to see into things though thank God I’m well and happy and William hopes to keep me so.</p>
				<p>“Well I must close now trusting that you are in the best of health. Your old Pollie.</p>
				<p>“Miss Fenne have been very poorly of late so I’ve heard though not yet took to her bed⁠—more peculiar than ever about Church and suchlike. Adam Waggett being W’s oldest friend though not my choice was to have been Best Man but he’s in service in London and couldn’t come.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>But if I pined for Pollie’s company, how can I express what the absence of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater meant to me? Even when I had grown used to my new quarters, I would sometimes wake myself calling her name in a dream. She had been almost unendurably kind to me that last May morning in Wanderslore, when she had come to fetch me from yet another long adieu⁠—to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Anon. After he had gone, she and I had sat on for a while in that fresh spring beauty, a sober and miserable pair. Miserable on my side for miserable reasons. Then, if ever, had been the moment wherein to clear my breast and be in spirit as well as heart at one with her. Yet part for honesty and part for shame, I had remained silent. I could only comfort myself with remembering that we should soon meet again, and that the future might be kinder. Well, sometimes the future is kinder, but it is never the same thing as the past.</p>
			<p>“They may perhaps talk about that unfortunate⁠ ⁠… about that poor young <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble, miss,” was one of my landlady’s last remarks, as she sat staring rigidly at the great, empty house. “We all take good care to spread about each other’s horrors; and what else is a newspaper for? If so; well, I shouldn’t ask it, I suppose. But I’ve been thinking maybe my Fanny wasn’t <em>everything</em> to blame. We’ve had it out together, she and I, though only by letter. She was frightened of me as much as anything, though goodness knows I tried to bring her up a God-fearing child. She had no one, as she thought, to go to⁠—and him a weak creature for all his obstinacy and, as you might say, penned in by his mother and his cloth. They say the Cartholics don’t marry, and there’s nothing much to be wondered at in that. Poor young fellow, he won’t bear much thinking on, even when he’s gone out of mind. I’m fearing now that what’s come about may make her wilder and harder. Help her all you can, if only in your thoughts, miss: she sets more store by you than you might guess.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed, indeed, I will,” I said.</p>
			<p>“You see, miss,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater monotoned on, “I’m nothing much better than an aunt for Fanny, with no children of my own for guidance; and him there helpless with his broken leg in Buenos Aires.” The long, bonneted face moved round towards me. “Do you feel <em>any</em> smouldering affections for the young gentleman that’s just gone?”</p>
			<p>This was an unexpected twist to our talk, but, in some little confusion, I met it as candidly as I could.</p>
			<p>“I am fonder of Fanny⁠—and, of course, of you, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater; oh, far, far. But⁠—I don’t quite know how to express it⁠—I am, as you might say, in my own <em>mind</em> with him. I think he knows a little what I am, in myself I mean. And besides, oh, well, it isn’t a miserable thing to feel that just one’s company makes <em>anybody</em> happy.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater considered this reply for some little time.</p>
			<p>“He didn’t <em>look</em> any too happy just now, to judge from his back view,” she remarked oracularly. “And when I was.⁠ ⁠… But there, miss, I’m thinking only of your comfort, and I’m not quite as comfortable as might be over that there <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie. Generous she may be, though not noticing it much perhaps from a purse with no bottom to it, judging from what I’ve seen. God bless you, one way or the other. And perhaps you’ll sometimes remember the bits of Sundays we’ve shared up there⁠—you and the old Dragon.”</p>
			<p>A smile and a tear battled for the dark eye that looked down on me. Indeed, seldom after came a Sunday evening with its clanking bells and empty, London hush, but it brought back to me with a pang my hymns and talks with “the old Dragon.” Not that anyone I ever saw at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s appeared to work so hard as to <em>need</em> a day of rest. There was merely a peculiar empty sensation on Sundays of there being nothing “to do.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>A flight of stone steps and a pillared porch led up to her great ornamental door. Beyond was a hall compared with which the marbles of Brunswick House were mere mosaic. An alabaster fountain, its jet springing lightly from a gilded torch held by a crouching faun, cooled, and discreetly murmured a ceaseless Hush! in the air. On either hand, a wide, shallow staircase ascended to an enormous gilded drawing-room, with its chairs and pictures; and to the library. The dining-room stood opposite the portico. When <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie and I were alone, we usually shared a smaller room with her parrot, Chakka; her little Chinese dog, Cherry⁠—whose whimper had a most uncomfortable resemblance to the wild and homesick cry of my seagulls at Lyme Regis⁠—and her collections of the world’s smaller rarities. It is only, I suppose, one more proof of how volatile a creature I used to be that I took an intense interest in the contents of these cabinets for a few days, and then found them nothing but a vexation. No doubt this was because of an uneasy suspicion that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie had also collected <em>me</em>.</p>
			<p>She could be extremely tactful in her private designs, yet she “showed me off” in a fashion that might have turned a far less giddy head than her protégée’s, and perhaps cannot have been in the best of taste.</p>
			<p>So sure had she been of me that, when I arrived, a room on the first floor of <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 had already been prepared for my reception. A wonderful piece of fantasticalness⁠—like a miniature fairy palace, but without a vestige of any <em>real</em> make-believe in it. It was panelled and screened with carvings in wood, inlaid with silver and mother-of-pearl⁠—dwarfs and apes and misshapen gods and goddesses leering and gaping out at one from amidst leafy branches, flowers, and fruits, and birds, and butterflies. The faintest sniff of that Indian wood⁠—whatever it was⁠—recalls to this day that nightmare scenery. Its hangings were of a silk so rich that they might have stood on edge on the floor. These screens and tapestries guarded a privacy that rarely, alas, contained a Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> worth being in private <em>with</em>.</p>
			<p>The one piece of chagrin exhibited by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie in those early days of our acquaintance was at my insistence on bringing at least a few of my familiar sticks of furniture and chattels with me from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s. Their plain Sheraton design, she thought, was barbarously out of keeping with the rest. It was; but I had my way.</p>
			<p>Not the least precious of these old possessions, though dismal for its memories, was the broken money chest which Fanny had pushed in under the yew in the garden at Wanderslore. Tacked up in canvas, its hinges and lock repaired, it had been sent on to me a week or two after my farewells to Beechwood, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Anon. Inside it I found the nightgown I had buried in the rabbit’s hole, Fanny’s letter from under its stone, my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sense and Sensibility</i>, and last, pinned on to a scrap of kingfisher coloured silk, a pair of earrings made out of two old gold coins. Apart from a few withered flowers, they are the only thing I possess that came from Wanderslore. Long afterwards, I showed these earrings to Sir <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. P.</abbr> He told me they were quarter Rose Nobles of Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>’s reign, and only a quarter of a quarter of an ounce in weight. They weigh pretty heavy for me now, however.</p>
			<p>My arrangement with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie had been that, however long I might stay with her, I should still be in the nature of a visitor; that <abbr>No.</abbr> 2, in fact, should be my town house, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s my country. But I was soon to realize that she intended <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater to have a very small share in me. She pretended to be jealous of me, to love me for my own sweet sake; and even while I knew it was mere pretence, it left its flattery on my mind; and for the first time in my life I feigned to be even smaller than I was; would mince my speeches, affect to be clever, even ogle the old lady, until it might be supposed we were a pair of queerly-assorted characters in a charade.</p>
			<p>Nevertheless, I had had the obstinacy to insist that I should be at liberty to stay with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater whenever I wished to do so; and I was free to invite any friend to visit me I chose. “And especially, my dear, anyone an eighth as exquisite,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie had kindly put it. It may seem a little strange that all these obligations should have been on her side. But <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monnerie’s whims were far more vigorous than most people’s principles. The dews of her loving kindness descended on me in a shower, and it was some little time before I began to feel a chill.</p>
			<p>Not the least remarkable feature of <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 was its back view. The window of my room came down almost to the floor. It “commanded” an immense zinc cistern⁠—George, by name⁠—a Virginia Creeper groping along a brick wall, similar cisterns smalling into the distance, other brick walls and scores of back windows. Once, after contemplating this odd landscape for some little time, it occurred to me to speculate what the back view from the House of Life was like; but I failed to conceive the smallest notion of it. I rarely drew my curtains, and, oddly enough, when I did so, was usually in a vacant or dismal mood. My lights were electric. One simply twisted a tiny ivory button. At first their clear and coloured globes, set like tiny tulips in a candelabra, charmed my fancy. But, such is custom, I soon wearied of them, and pined for the slim, <em>living</em> flame of candles⁠—even for my coarse old night-light swimming in its grease in a chipped blue and white saucer.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
