<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
			<p>A carpenter of the name of Bates was called in, so distant a relative of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s apparently that she never by nod, word, or look acknowledged the bond. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bates held my landlady in almost speechless respect. “A woman in a thousand,” he repeatedly assured me, when we were grown a little accustomed to one another; “a woman in <em>ten</em> thousand. And if things hadn’t been what they was, you may understand, they might have turned out different. Ah, miss, there’s one looking down on us could tell a tale.” I looked up past his oblong head at the ceiling, but only a few flies were angling round the chandelier.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s compliments were less indirect. “That <em>Bates</em>,” she would say, surveying his day’s handiwork after he was gone, “is all thumbs.”</p>
			<p>He was certainly rather snail-like in his movements, and spent most of his time slowly rubbing his hands on the stiff apron that encased him. But I minded his thumbs far less than his gluepot.</p>
			<p>Many years have passed, yet at the very whisper of his name, that inexpressible odour clouds up into my nose. It now occurs to me for the first time that he never sent in his bill. Either his memory failed him, or he carpentered for love. Level with the wide table in the window recess, strewn over with my small Persian mats, whereon I sat, sewed, read, and took my meals, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bates constructed a broad shelf, curtained off on three sides from the rest of the room. On this wooden stage stood my four-poster, wardrobe, and other belongings. It was my bedchamber. From table to floor he made a staircase, so that I could easily descend and roam the room at large. The latter would have been more commodious if I could have persuaded <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater to empty it a little. If I had <em>kept on</em> looking at the things in it I am sure I should have gone mad. Even tact was unavailing. If only there had been the merest tinge of a Cromwell in my character, the baubles that would have been removed!</p>
			<p>There were two simpering plaster figures⁠—a Shepherd and Shepherdess⁠—nearly half my height on the chimneypiece, whom I particularly detested; also an enlarged photograph in a discoloured frame on the wall⁠—that of a thick-necked, formidable man, with a bush of whisker on either cheek, and a high, quarrelsome stare. He made me feel intensely self-conscious. It was like a wolf looking all day into a sheepfold. So when I had my meals, I invariably turned my back on his portrait.</p>
			<p>I went early to bed. But now that the autumnal dusks were shortening, an hour or two of artificial light was necessary. The flare of the gas dazzled and stupefied me, and gave me a kind of hunted feeling; so <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater procured for me a couple of fine little glass candlesticks. In bed I sometimes burned a wax-light in a saucer, a companionable thing for night-thoughts in a strange place. Often enough I sat through the evening with no other illumination than that of the smouldering coals, so that I could see out of the window. It was an endless source of amusement to withdraw the muslin curtains, gaze out over the darkened fields beyond the roadway, and let my daydreams wander at will.</p>
			<p>At nine o’clock <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater would bring me my supper⁠—some fragments of rusk, or of bread, and milk. My food was her constant anxiety. The difficulty, as she explained, was to supply me with <em>little</em> enough to eat⁠—at least of cooked food: “It dries up in the winking of an eye.” So her cat, Henry, fared more sumptuously than ever, though the jealous creature continued to reject all my advances, and as far as possible ignored my existence. “Simple victuals, by all means, miss,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater would admit. “But if it don’t enjoy, the inside languishes; and you are not yet of an age that can fall back on skin and bone.”</p>
			<p>The question of food presently introduced that of money. She insisted on reducing her charges to twenty shillings a week. “There’s the lodging, and there’s the board, the last being as you might say all but unmentionable; and honesty the best policy though I have never tried the reverse.” So, in spite of all my protestations, it was agreed. And I thus found myself mistress of a round fifty-eight pounds a year over and above what I paid to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater. Messrs Harris, Harris, and Harris were punctual as quarter-day: and so was I. I “<em>at once</em>” paid over to my landlady £13 and whatever other sum was needful. The “charity” my godmother had recommended began, and, alas, remained at home. I stowed the rest under lock and key in one of my grandfather’s boxes which I kept under my bed. This was an imprudent habit, perhaps. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater advocated the Penny Bank. But the thought of my money being so handy and <em>palpable</em> reassured me. I would count it over in my mind, as if it were a means to salvation; and became, in consequence, near and parsimonious.</p>
			<p>Occasionally when she had “business” to transact, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater would be off to London. There she would purchase for me any little trifle required for the replenishment of my wardrobe. Needing so little, I could afford the finest materials; my sovereign was worth at least sixty shillings. Rather than “fine,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater preferred things “good”; and for this “goodness,” I must confess, she sometimes made rather alarming sacrifices of appearance. Still, I was already possessed of a serviceable stock of clothes, and by aid of one of my dear mother’s last presents to me, a shiny Swiss miniature workbox with an inlaid picture of the Lake of Geneva on the lid, I soon became a passable needlewoman.</p>
			<p>I love bright, pure colours, and, my sweeping and dusting and bedmaking over, and my external mourning for my father at an end, a remarkably festive figure would confront me in my cheval glass of an afternoon. The hours I spent in dressing my hair and matching this bit of colour with that. I would talk to myself in the glass, too, for company’s sake, and make believe I was a dozen different characters. I was young. I pined for life and companionship, and having only my own⁠—for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater was rather a faithful feature of the landscape than a fellow being⁠—I made as much, and as many, of myself as possible.</p>
			<p>Another question that deeply engaged my landlady was my health. She mistrusted open windows, but strongly recommended “air.” What insidious maladies she spied around me! Indeed that September was unusually hot. I sat on my table in the window like a cricket in an oven, sorely missing my high open balcony, the garden, and the stream. Once and again <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater would take me for a little walk after sunset. Discretion to her was much the better part of valour; nor had I quite recovered from my experiences in the train. But such walks⁠—though solitary enough at that hour of the day⁠—were straggly and irksome. Pollie’s arm had been a kind of second nature to me; but <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, I think, had almost as fastidious a disinclination to carrying me as I have to being carried. I languished for liberty. Being a light sleeper, I would often awake at daybreak and the first call of the birds. Then the hill⁠—which led to Tyddlesdon End and Love (or Loose) Lane⁠—was deserted. Thought of the beyond haunted me like a passion. At a convenient moment I intimated to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater how secure was the street at this early hour, how fresh the meadows, and how thirsty for independent outings her lodger. “Besides, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, I am not a child, and who could see me?”</p>
			<p>After anxious and arduous discussion, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bates was once more consulted. He wrapped himself in a veritable blanket of reflection, and all but became unconscious before he proposed a most ingenious device. With <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s consent, she being her own landlady and amused at the idea, he cut out of one of the lower panels of her parlour door a round-headed opening just of an easy size to suit me. In this aperture he hung a delicious little door that precisely fitted it. So also with the door into the street⁠—to which he added a Brahmah lock. By cementing a small square stone into the corner of each of the steps down from the porch, he eased <em>that</em> little difficulty. May Heaven bless <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bates! With his key round my neck, stoop once, stoop twice, a scamper down his steps, and I was free⁠—as completely mistress of my goings-out and of my comings-in as every self-respecting person should be.</p>
			<p>“That’s what my father would have called a good job, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bates,” said I cordially.</p>
			<p>He looked yearningly at me, as if about to impart a profound secret; but thought better of it. “Well, miss, what I say is, a job’s a <em>job</em>; and if it <em>is</em> a job, it’s a job that should be made a job <em>of</em>.”</p>
			<p>As I dot the <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">i</i>’s and cross the <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">t</i>’s of this manuscript, I often think⁠—a little ruefully⁠—of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bates.</p>
			<p>As soon as daybreak was piercing into my region of the sky, and before <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater or the rest of the world was stirring, I would rise, make my candlelit toilet, and hasten out into the forsaken sweet of the morning. If it broke wet or windy, I could turn over and go to sleep again. A few hundred yards up the hill, the road turned off, as I have said, towards Tyddlesdon End and Loose Lane⁠—very stony and steep. On the left, and before the fork, a wicket gate led into the woods and the park of empty Wanderslore. To the verge of these deserted woods made a comfortable walk for me.</p>
			<p>If, as might happen, any other wayfarer was early abroad, I could conceal myself in the tussocks of grass and bushes that bordered the path. In my thick veil, with my stout green parasol and inconspicuous shawl, I made a queer and surprising figure no doubt. Indeed, from what I have heard, the ill fame of Wanderslore acquired a still more piquant flavour in the town by reports that elf-folk had been descried on its outskirts. But if I sometimes skipped and capered in these early outings, it was for exercise as well as suppressed high spirits. To be prepared, too, for the want of such facilities in the future, I had the foresight to accustom myself to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s steep steps as well as to my cemented-in “Bateses,” as I called them. My only difficulty was to decide whether to practice on them when I was fresh at the outset of my walk, or fatigued at the end of it. Naturally people grow “peculiar” when much alone: self plays with self, and the mimicry fades.</p>
			<p>These little expeditions, of course, had their spice of danger, and it made them the more agreeable. A strange dog might give me a fright. There was an old vixen which once or twice exchanged glances with me at a distance. But with my parasol I was a match for most of the creatures which humanity has left unslaughtered. My sudden appearance might startle or perplex them. But if few were curious, fewer far were unfriendly. Boys I feared most. A hulking booby once stoned me through the grass, but fortunately he was both a coward and a poor marksman. Until winter came, I doubt if a single sunshine morning was wasted. Many a rainy one, too, found me splashing along, though then I must be a careful walker to avoid a sousing.</p>
			<p>The birds renewed their autumn song, the last flowers were blossoming. Concealed by scattered tufts of bracken where an enormous beech forked its roots and cast a golden light from its withering leaves, I would spend many a solitary hour. Above the eastern treetops my Kent stretched into the distance beneath the early skies. Far to my left and a little behind me rose the chimneys of gloomy Wanderslore. Breathing in the gentle air, the dreamer within would stray at will. There I kept the anniversary of my mother’s birthday; twined a wreath for her of ivy-flowers and winter green; and hid it secretly in a forsaken blackbird’s nest in the woods.</p>
			<p>Still I longed for my old home again. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s was a stuffy and meagre little house, and when meals were in preparation, none too sweet to the nose. Especially low I felt, when a scrawling letter was now and then delivered by the postman from Pollie. Her spelling and grammar intensified my homesickness. Miss Fenne, too, had not forgotten me. I pored over her spidery epistles till my head ached. Why, if I had been so rash and undutiful, was she so uneasy? Even the texts she chose had a parched look. The thought of her spectacling my minute handwriting and examining the proof that I was still a child of wrath, gave my pride a silly qualm. So <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater came to my rescue, and between us we concocted replies to her which, I am afraid, were not more intelligible for a tendency on my landlady’s part to express my sentiments in the third person.</p>
			<p>This little service set her thinking of Sunday and church. She was not, she told me, “what you might call a religious woman,” having been compelled “to keep her head up in the world, and all not being gold that glitters.” She was none the less a regular attendant at <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s⁠—a church a mile or so away in the valley, whose five bells of a Sabbath evening never failed to recall my thoughts to Lyndsey and to dip me into the waters of melancholy. I loved their mellow clanging in the lap of the wind, yet it was rather doleful to be left alone with my candles, and only Henry sullenly squatting in the passage awaiting his mistress’s return.</p>
			<p>“Not that you need making any <em>better</em>, miss,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater assured me. “Even a buttercup⁠—or a retriever dog, for that matter⁠—being no fuller than it can hold of what it is, in a manner of speaking. But there’s the next world to be accounted for, and hopes of reunion on another shore, where, so I understand, mere size, body or station, will not be noticeable in the sight of the Lamb. <em>Not</em> that I hold with the notion that only the good so-called will be there.”</p>
			<p>This speech, I must confess, made me exceedingly uncomfortable.</p>
			<p>“Wherever I go, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater,” I replied hastily, “I shall not be happy unless you are there.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">D.V.</abbr>,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, grimly, “I will.”</p>
			<p>Still, I remained unconverted to <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s. Why, I hardly know: perhaps it was her reference to its pew rents, or her description of the vicar’s daughters (who were now nursing their father at Tunbridge Wells), or maybe even it was a stare from her husband which I happened at that precise moment to intercept from the wall. Possibly if I myself had taken a “sitting,” this aura of formality would have faded away. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater was a little reassured, however, to hear that my father and mother, in spite of Miss Fenne, had seldom taken me to church. They had concluded that my absence was best both for me and for the congregation. And I told her of our little evening services in the drawing-room, with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ballard, the parlourmaid, Pollie, and the Boy on the sofa, just as it happened to be their respective “Sundays in.”</p>
			<p>This set her mind at rest. Turn and turn about, on one Sunday evening she went to <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s and brought back with her the text and crucial fragments of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble’s sermon, and on the next we read the lessons together and sang a hymn. Once, indeed, I embarked upon a solo, “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song">As Pants the Hart</span>,” one of my mother’s favourite airs. But I got a little shaky at “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song">O for the Wings</span>,” and there was no rambling, rumbling chorus from my father. But Sunday was not my favourite day on Beechwood Hill. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater looked a little formal with stiff white “frilling” round her neck. She reminded me of a leg of mutton. To judge from the gloom and absentmindedness into which they sometimes plunged her, quotations from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble could be double-edged. My real joy was to hear her views on the fashions and manners of her fellow-worshippers.</p>
			<p>Well, so the months went by. Winter came with its mists and rains and frosts, and a fire in the polished grate was no longer an evening luxury but a daily need. As often as possible I went out walking. When the weather was too inclement, I danced for an hour or so, for joy and exercise, and went swimming on a chair. I would entertain myself also in watching through the muslin curtains the few passersby; sorting out their gaits, and noses, and clothes, and acquaintances, and guessing their characters, occupations, and circumstances. Certain little looks and movements led me to suppose that, even though I was perfectly concealed, the more sensitive among them were vaguely uneasy under this secret scrutiny. In such cases (though very reluctantly) I always drew my eyes away: first because I did not like the thought of encroaching on their privacy, and next, because I was afraid their uneasiness might prevent them coming again. But this microscopic examination of mankind must cease with dusk, and the candle-hours passed rather heavily at times. The few books I had brought away from Lyndsey were mine now nearly by heart. So my eye would often wander up to a small bookcase that hung out of reach on the other side of the chimneypiece.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
