<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
			<p>I surveyed with horror the recumbent, angular figure stretched out on the long, narrow, horsehair sofa. The shut eyes⁠—it was selfish to leave me like this.</p>
			<p>“There, miss, don’t take on,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Petrie was saying. “The poor thing’s coming round now. Slipping dead off out of things⁠—many’s the time I’ve wished I could⁠—even though you <em>have</em> come down for a bit of pleasuring.”</p>
			<p>But it was Lyme Regis’s solemn, round-shouldered doctor who reassured me. At first sight of him I knew <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater was not going to die. He looked down on her, politely protesting that she must not attempt to get up. “This unseasonable heat, perhaps. The heart, of course, not so strong as it might be.” He ordered her complete rest in bed for a few days⁠—light nourishment, no worry, and he would look in again. Me he had not detected under the serge window-curtain, though he cast an uneasy glance around him, I fancied, on leaving the room.</p>
			<p>After remaining alone under the still, sunshiny window until I could endure it no longer, I climbed up the steep, narrow stairs to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s bedroom, and sat a while clasping the hand that hung down from the bed. The blind gently ballooned in the breeze. Raying lights circled across the ceiling, as carriage and cart glided by on the esplanade. Fearful lest even my fingertips should betray me to the flat shape beneath the counterpane, I tried hard to think. My mind was in a whirl of fears and forebodings; but there was but one thing, supremely urgent, facing me now. I must forget my own miseries, and somehow contrive to send Fanny the money she needed.</p>
			<p><em>Somehow</em>; but how? The poor little hoard which I had saved from my quarterly allowances lay locked up on Beechwood Hill in my box beneath my bed. By what conceivable means could I regain possession of it, unknown to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater?</p>
			<p>Conscience muttered harsh words in my ear as I sat there holding that cold, limp hand with mine, while these inward schemings shuttled softly to and fro.</p>
			<p>When my patient had fallen asleep, I got downstairs again⁠—a more resolute, if not a better woman. Removing latch and box keys from their ribbon round my neck, I enclosed them in an envelope with a letter:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<b epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Anon</b>⁠—I want you, please, to help me. The large one of these two keys unlocks my little house door: the smaller one a box under my bed. Would you please let yourself in at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s tomorrow evening when it’s dark⁠—there will be nobody there⁠—take out Twenty Pounds which you will find in the box, and send them to <em>Miss Fanny Bowater, the Crown and Anchor Hotel, B⁠⸺⁠</em>. I will thank you when I come.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Believe me, yours very sincerely,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">“<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. M.</abbr>”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>It is curious. Many a false, pandering word had sprung to my tongue when I was concocting this letter in my mind beside <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s bed, and even with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Petrie’s stubby, ink-corroded pen in my hand. Yet some last shred of honesty compelled me to be brief and frigid. I was simply determined to be utterly open with <em>him</em>, even though I seemed to myself like the dark picture of a man in a bog struggling to grope his way out. I dipped my fingers into a vase of wallflowers, wetted the gum, sealed down the envelope, and wrote on it this address: <abbr>Mr.</abbr> ⸻, Lodging at a cottage near the Farm, Northwest of Wanderslore, Beechwood, Kent. And I prayed heaven for its safe delivery.</p>
			<p>For Fanny no words would come⁠—nothing but a mere bare promise that I would help her as soon as I could⁠—an idiot’s message. The next three days were an almost insupportable solitude. From <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Anon no answer could be expected, since in my haste I had forgotten to give him <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Petrie’s address. I brooded in horror of what the failure of my letter to reach him might entail. I shared Fanny’s damnation. Wherever I went, a silent <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble dogged my footsteps. Meanwhile, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s newspaper, I discovered, lay concealed beneath her pillow.</p>
			<p>At length I could bear myself no longer, and standing beside her bed, asked if I might read it. Until that moment we had neither of us even referred to the subject. Propped up on her pillows, her long face looking a strange colour against their whiteness, she considered my request.</p>
			<p>“Well, miss,” she said at last, “you know too much to know no more.”</p>
			<p>I spread out the creased sheets on the worn carpet, and read slowly the smudged, matter-of-fact account from beginning to end. There were passages in it that imprinted themselves on my memory like a photograph. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble had taken the evening Service that last day looking “ill and worn, though never in what may be described as robust health, owing to his indefatigable devotion to his ecclesiastical and parochial duties.” The Service over, and the scanty congregation dispersed, he had sat alone in the vestry for so unusual a time that the verger of <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s, a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Soames, anxious to get home to his supper, had at length looked in on him at the door, to ask if his services were required any further. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble had “raised his head as if startled,” and “had smiled in the negative,” and then, “closing the eastern door behind him,” had “hastened” out of the church. No other human eye had encountered him until he was found at 11:27 <abbr>p.m.</abbr> in an outhouse at the foot of his mother’s garden. “The head of the unfortunate gentleman was well-nigh severed from the body.” “He was an only son, and was in his twenty-ninth year. Universal sympathy will be extended by all to the aged lady who is prostrated by this tragic occurrence.”</p>
			<p>Propped on my hands and knees, fearful that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater might interrupt me before I was prepared, I stared fixedly at the newspaper. I understood all that it said, yet it was as strange to me as if it had been written in Hebrew. I had seen, I had known, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crimble. Who, then, was this? My throat drew together as I turned my head a little and managed to inquire, “What is an inquest, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater?”</p>
			<p>“Fretting out the why’s and wherefore’s,” came the response, muffled by a handkerchief pressed close to her mouth.</p>
			<p>“And⁠—<em>this</em> ‘why’?” I whispered, stooping low.</p>
			<p>“That’s between him and his Maker,” said the voice. “The poor young man had set his heart on we know where. As we make our bed so we must lie on it, miss. It’s for nobody to judge: though it may be a lesson.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, then you knew I knew.”</p>
			<p>“No, no. Not <em>your</em> lesson, miss. I didn’t mean that. It’s not for you to fret yourself, though I must say⁠—I have always made it a habit, though without prying, please God, to be aware of more than interference could set right. Fanny and I have talked the affair over till we couldn’t look in each other’s faces for fear of what we might say. But she’s <em><abbr>Mr.</abbr></em> Bowater’s child, through and through, and my firm hand was not firm enough, maybe. You did what you could. It’s not in human conscience to ask more than the natural frame can bear.”</p>
			<p>Did what I could.⁠ ⁠… I cowered, staring at my knuckles, and it seemed that a little concourse of strangers, heads close together, were talking in my mind. My eyes were dry; I think the spectre of a smile had dragged up my lips. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater raised herself in her bed, and peered over at me.</p>
			<p>“It’s the letters,” she whispered at me. “If he hasn’t destroyed them, they’ll be read to the whole parish.”</p>
			<p>I crouched lower. “You’ll be thankful to be rid of me. I shall be thankful to be rid of myself, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater.”</p>
			<p>She thrust a long, skinny arm clean out of the bed. “Come away, there; come away,” she cried.</p>
			<p>“Oh,” I said, “take me away, take me away. I can’t bear it, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater. I don’t <em>want</em> to be alive.”</p>
			<p>“There, miss, rest now, and think no more.” She smoothed my hair, clucked a little low, whistling tune, as if for lullaby. “Why, there now,” she muttered sardonically, “you might almost suppose I had been a mother myself!”</p>
			<p>There was silence between us for a while, then, quietly raising herself, she looked down at me on the pillow, and, finding me to be still awake, a long smile spread over her face: “Why, we don’t seem neither of us to be much good at daytime sleeping.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
