<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
			<p>Am I sorry that almost beside myself with this new affliction, and bewildered and frightened by the incessant coming and going of strangers in the house, I refused to be carried down to bid that unanswering face goodbye? No, I have no regret on that score. The older I grow the more closely I seem to understand him. If phantoms of memory have any reality⁠—and it is wiser, I think, to remember the face of the living rather than the stony peace of the dead⁠—he has not forgotten his only daughter.</p>
			<p>Double-minded creature I was and ever shall be; now puffed up with arrogance at the differences between myself and gross, common-sized humanity; now stupidly sensitive to the pangs to which by reason of these differences I have to submit. At times I have been tempted to blame my parents for my shortcomings. What wicked folly⁠—they did not choose their only child. After all, too, fellow creatures of any size seem much alike. They rarely have <em>nothing</em> to blame Providence for⁠—the length of their noses or the size of their feet, their bones or their corpulence, the imbecilities of their minds or their bodies, the “accidents” of birth, breeding, station, or circumstance. Yet how secure and perhaps wholesome is Man’s self-satisfaction. To what ideal does he compare himself but to a self-perfected abstraction of his own image? Even his Venus and Apollo are mere flattering reflections of his own he- or she-shapes. And what of his anthropomorphic soul?</p>
			<p>As for myself, Dame Nature may some day take a fancy to the dwarf. “What a pretty play it would be”⁠—I have clean forgotten where I chanced on this amusing passage⁠—“What a pretty play it would be if, from the next generation onwards, the only humans born into the world should be of mere pygmy stature. Fifty years hence there would remain but few of the normal-sized in the land. Imagine these aged few, miserably stalking through the dwarfed streets, picking up a scanty livelihood in city or countryside, where their very boots would be a public danger, their very tread would set the bells in the steeples ringing, and their appetites would be a national incubus. House, shop, church, high road, furniture, vehicles abandoned or sunken to the pygmy size; wars and ceremonies, ambitions and enterprises, everything but prayers, dwindled to the petty. Would great-grandfather be venerated, cherished, admired, a welcome guest, a lamented emigrant? Would there be as many mourners as sextons at his funeral, as many wreaths as congratulations at his grave?” And so on and so forth⁠—like Jonathan Swift.</p>
			<p>But I must beware. Partly from fatigue and partly from dislike of the version of Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> that stared out of his picture at me, I had begun, I remember, to be a little fretful when old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wagginhorne was painting my portrait. And I complained pertly that I thought there were far too many azaleas on the potted bush.</p>
			<p>“Ah, little Miss Finical,” he said, “take care, if you please. Once there was a Diogenes whom the gods shut up in a tub and fed on his own spleen. He died.⁠ ⁠… He died,” he repeated, drawing his brush slowly along the canvas, “of dyspepsia.”</p>
			<p>He popped round, “Think of that.”</p>
			<p>I can think of that to better purpose now, and if there is one thing in the world whose company I shall deplore in my coffin, that thing is a Cynic. That is why I am trying as fast as I can to put down my experiences in black and white before the black predominates.</p>
			<p>But I must get back to my story. My poor father had left his affairs in the utmost disorder. His chief mourners were his creditors. Apart from these, one or two old country friends and distant relatives, I believe, attended his funeral, but none even of them can have been profoundly interested in the Hop, the Oyster, or the Cherry, at least in the abstract. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Grose, owing to ill-health, had given up his practice and was gone abroad. But though possibly inquiry was made after the small creature that had been left behind, I stubbornly shut myself away in my room under the roof, listening in a fever of apprehension to every sinister movement in the house beneath.</p>
			<p>Yet if a friend in need is a friend indeed, then I must confess that my treatment of Miss Fenne was the height of ingratitude.</p>
			<p>In my grief and desolation, the future seemed to be only a veil beyond the immediate present, which I had neither the wish nor the power to withdraw. Miss Fenne had no such illusions. I begged Pollie to make any excuse she could think of to prevent her from seeing me. But at last she pushed her way up, and doubtless, the news and the advice she brought were the best tonic that could have been prescribed for me.</p>
			<p>As a child I had always associated my godmother with the crocodile (though not with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bosch’s charming conception of it, in his picture of the Creation). Yet there were no tears in her faded eyes when she explained that of my father’s modest fortune not a pittance remained. In a few days the house, with everything in it except my own small sticks of furniture, was to be sold by auction. I must keep my door locked against intruders. All that would be left to me was a small income of about £110 per annum, derived from money bequeathed to me by a relative of my mother’s whom I had never seen.</p>
			<p>“I fancy your father knew nothing about it,” she concluded, “at least so your dear <em>mother</em> seemed to imply. But there! it’s a sad business, a sad business. And that Tapa scandal; a lamentable affair.” Having thus prepared the way, my godmother proposed that I should take up my residence in her house, and commit my future entirely to her charge.</p>
			<p>“You cannot be an expensive guest,” she explained, “and I am sure you will try to be a grateful one. No truly <em>conscientious</em> godparent, my dear child, <em>ever</em> relinquishes the soul committed to her care. I sometimes wonder whether your poor dear mother realized this.”</p>
			<p>But it was my soul, if that is brother to the spirit and can be neighbour to pride, that revolted against her proposition. I had to shut my eyes at the very remembrance of Miss Fenne’s prim and musty drawing-room. Every intimation, every jerk of her trembling head, every pounce of her jewelled fingers only hardened my heart. Poor Miss Fenne. Her resentment at my refusal seemed to increase her shortness of sight. Looking in on her from my balcony, I had the advantage of her, as she faced me in the full light in her chair, dressed up in her old lady’s clothes like a kind of human Alp among my pygmy belongings. I tried to be polite, but this only increased her vexation. One smart tap of the ivory ball that topped her umbrella would have been my coup de grâce. She eyed me, but never administered it.</p>
			<p>At last she drew in her lips and fell silent. Then, as may happen at such moments, her ill-temper and chagrin, even the sense of her own dignity drooped away, and for a while in the quietness we were simply two ill-assorted human beings, helpless in the coils of circumstance. She composed her mouth, adjusted her bonnet strings, peered a moment from dim old eyes out of the window, then once more looked at me.</p>
			<p>“It must be, then, as God wills,” she said in a trembling voice. “The spirit of your poor dear mother must be judge between us. She has, we may trust, gone to a better world.”</p>
			<p>For a moment my resolution seemed to flow away like water, and I all but surrendered. But a rook cawed close overhead, and I bit my lip. Little more was said, except that she would consider it her duty to find me a comfortable and God-fearing home. But she admonished me of the future, warned me that the world was a network of temptations, and assured me of her prayers. So we parted. I bowed her out of my domain. It was the last time we met. Two days afterwards I received her promised letter:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<b epub:type="salutation">My Dear Godchild</b>⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ambrose Pellew, an old <em>clergyman</em> friend of mine, in whose discretion and knowledge of the world I have every confidence, has spoken for you to an old married, respectable servant of his now living a few miles from London⁠—a <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater. For the charge of thirty shillings a week she has consented to give you board, lodging, and <em>reasonable</em> attendance. In all the circumstances this seems to me to be a moderate sum. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pellew assures me that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> is clean, honest, and a <em>practising</em> Christian. When this dreadful Sale is over, I have arranged that Pollie shall conduct you safely to what will in future be your <em>home</em>. I trust that you will be as happy there as Providence permits, though I cannot doubt that your poor dear mother and your poor father, too, for that matter, would have wished otherwise⁠—that the roof of her old friend who was present at your Baptism and <em>insisted</em> on your Confirmation, should have been your refuge and asylum now that you are absolutely alone in the world.</p>
				<p>“However, you have rejected this proposal, and have <em>chosen your own path</em>. I am not your legal guardian, and I am too deeply <em>pained</em> to refer again to your obstinacy and ingratitude. Rest assured that, in spite of all, I shall remember you in my prayers, and I trust, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">D.V.</abbr>, that you will escape the temptations of this wicked world⁠—a world in which it has pleased God, in spite of self-sacrificing and anxious friends, to place you at so distressing a disadvantage. But in His Sight all men are equal. Let that be your continual consolation. See Amos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 2; <abbr>Prov.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. 24⁠–⁠28; <abbr>Eccles.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 1.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“I remain, your affectionate godmother,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">“Emma <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Fenne.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">“<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.S.</abbr>⁠—I reopen this letter to explain that your <em>financial</em> affairs are in the hands of Messrs Harris, Harris, and Harris, respectable solicitors of Gray’s Inn. They will remit you on every quarter day⁠—Christmas Day, Lady Day, June 25th and September 29th⁠—the sum of £28 10<abbr>s.</abbr> 0<abbr>d.</abbr> Of this you will pay £19 10<abbr>s.</abbr> <em>at once</em> to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, who, I have no doubt, will advise you on the expenditure of what remains on wearing apparel, self-improvement, missions, charity, and so on. It <em>grieves</em> me that from the wreckage of your father’s affairs you must not anticipate a further straw of assistance. All his money and property will be swallowed up in the dreadful storm that has broken over what we can only <em>trust</em> is a tranquil resting place. <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">R.I.P.</abbr>⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">E.E.F.</abbr>”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>So sprawling and straggling was my godmother’s penmanship that I spelled her letter out at last with a minifying glass, though rather for forlorn amusement’s sake than by necessity. Not that this diminishment of her handwriting in any sense lessened the effect upon me of the sentiments it conveyed. They at once daunted me and gave me courage. For a little I hesitated, then at last I thought <em>out</em> in my heart that God might be kinder to me than Miss Fenne wished. Indeed I was so invigorated by the anticipation of the “wicked world,” that I all but called her a crocodile to her phantasmal face. Couldn’t I⁠—didn’t I⁠—myself “mean well” too? What pictures and prospects of the future, of my journey, of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater and the “network” pursued each other through my brain. And what a darkness oppressed me when a voice kept repeating over in my mind⁠—<em>Harris and Harris and Harris</em>, as if it were a refrain to one of my grandfather’s chansons. <em>Messrs Harris and Harris and Harris</em>⁠—I <em>saw</em> all three of them (dark men with whiskers), but trusted profoundly they would never come to see <em>me</em>.</p>
			<p>Nor from that day to this, through all my giddying “ups” and sobering “downs” have I ever for a moment regretted my decision⁠—though I might have conveyed it with a little better grace. My body, perhaps also my soul, would have been safer in the seclusion of my godmother’s house. But my spirit? I think it would have beaten itself to death there like a wasp on a windowpane. Whereas⁠—well, here I am.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
