<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
			<section id="introduction-1">
				<p>A few introductory and explanatory remarks are due, I think, to the reader of the following Memoirs. The Memoirs themselves will disclose how I became acquainted with Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name" class="eoc">M.</abbr> They also refer here and there to the small part I was enabled to take in straightening matters out at what was a critical juncture in her affairs, and in securing for her that independence which enabled her to live in the privacy she loved, without any anxiety as to ways and means. At the time, it is clear that she considered me a dilatory intermediary. I had not realized how extreme was her need. But she came at last to take a far too generous view of these trifling little services⁠—services as generously rewarded, since they afforded me the opportunity of frequently seeing her, and so of becoming, as I hope, one of her most devoted friends.</p>
				<p>One of the duties devolving on me as her sole executor⁠—certain unusual legal proceedings having been brought to completion⁠—was the examination of her letters and papers. Amongst these were her Memoirs⁠—which I found sealed up with her usual scrupulous neatness in numerous small, square, brown-paper packages, and laid carefully away in a cupboard in her old nursery. They were accompanied by a covering letter addressed to myself.</p>
				<p>Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s handwriting was even more minute than one might naturally, though not perhaps justifiably, have anticipated. Her manuscript would therefore have been difficult enough for aging eyes to decipher, even if it had not been almost inextricably interlined, revised and corrected. Literary composition to this little woman-of-letters was certainly no “primrose path.” The packages were therefore handed over to a trustworthy typist; and, at my direction, one complete and accurate copy was made of their contents.</p>
				<p>After careful consideration, and after disguising the names of certain persons and places to preclude every possibility of giving offence⁠—even <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Percy Maudlen, for instance, if she ever scans these pages, may blush unrecognized!⁠—I concluded that though I was under no absolute obligation to secure the publication of the Memoirs, this undoubtedly had been Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s intention and wish. At the same time, and for similar reasons, I decided that their publication should not take place until after my death. Instructions have therefore been left by me to this effect. Here then my editorial duties begin and end. Nothing has been altered; nothing suppressed.</p>
				<p>Even if such a task were within my province, I should not venture to make any critical estimate of Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s work. I am not a writer: and, as a reader, have an inveterate preference to be allowed to study and enjoy my authors with as little external intervention as possible. The perusal of the Memoirs has afforded me the deepest possible pleasure. The serious-minded may none the less dismiss a midget’s lucubrations as trifling; and no doubt⁠—it could hardly be otherwise⁠—a more practised taste than mine will discover many faults, crudities, and inconsistencies in them, though certain little prejudices on Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s side may not be so easily detectable. Whatever their merits or imperfections may be, I should be happy to think that the following pages may prove as interesting to other readers⁠—however few⁠—as they have been to myself.</p>
				<p>My own prejudices, I confess, are in Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s favour. Indeed, she herself assured me in the covering letter to which reference has been made, that a chance word of mine had been her actual incentive to composition⁠—the remark, in fact, that “the <i>truth</i> about even the least of things⁠—<i><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr></i>, your Self, Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name" class="eoc">M.</abbr>!⁠—may be a taper in whose beam one may peep at the truth about everything.” I cannot recall the occasion, or this little apophthegm. Indeed, only with extreme reluctance would I have helped to launch my small friend on her gigantic ordeal. As a matter-of-fact, she had a little way of carrying off scraps of the conversation of the “common-sized,” as a bee carries off a drop of nectar, and of transforming them into a honey all her own.</p>
				<p>As characteristic of her is the fact that during the whole time she was engaged on her writing (and there is ample evidence in her manuscript that, whether in fatigue, disinclination, or despair, she sometimes left it untouched for weeks together) she never made the faintest allusion to it. Authors, I believe⁠—if I may take the elder Disraeli for my authority⁠—are seldom so secretive concerning their activities. No less characteristically, her letter to me was dated February 14th. Her Memoirs were to be my Valentine.</p>
				<p>“ ‘Little drops of water⁠ ⁠…’ my dear Sir Walter,” she wrote; “you know the rest. Nevertheless, if only I had been given but one sharp spark of genius, what ‘infinite pains’ I should have been spared. Yet what is here concerns only my early days, and chiefly one long year of them. I might have written on⁠—almost <i>ad infinitum</i>. But I did not, because I feared to weary us both⁠—of myself. The years that have followed my ‘coming of age’ have been outwardly uneventful; and other people’s thoughts, I find, are not so interesting as their experiences. There’s much to forgive in what I have written⁠—the rawness, the self-consciousness, the vanity, the folly. I am older now; but am I wiser⁠—or merely not so young?</p>
				<p>“Just as it stands, then, I shall leave my story to, and for, you.⁠ ⁠… Again and again, as I have pored over the scenes of my memory, I have asked myself: What can life be about? What does it mean? What was my true course? Where my compass? How many times, too, have I vainly speculated what <i>inward</i> difference being a human creature of my dimensions really makes. What is⁠—deep, deep in⁠—at variance between Man and Midget? <i>You</i> may discover this; even if <i>I</i> never shall. For after all, life’s beads are all on one string, however loosely threaded they may seem to be.</p>
				<p>“I have tried to tell nothing but the truth about myself. But I realize that it cannot be the whole truth. For while so engaged (just as when one peers into a looking-glass in the moonlight) a something has at times looked out of some secret den or niche in me, and then has vanished. Supposing, then, my dear Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr>, my story convinces you that all these years you have unawares been harbouring in your friendship not a woman, scarcely a human being, but an <strong>asp</strong>! Oh dear, and oh dear! Well, there are three and-thirty ingredients (ingrediments as I used to call them, when I was a child) in that sovran antidote, Venice Treacle. Scatter a pennyweight of it upon my tombstone; and so lay my in-fi-ni-te-si-mal ap-pa-ri-ti-on!</p>
				<p>“Maybe though, there are not so very many vital differences between ‘midgets’ and people of the common size; no more, perhaps, than there are between them and ‘the Great.’ Even then it is possible that after reading my small, endless story you may be very thankful that you are not a Midget too.</p>
				<p>“Whether or not, I have tried to be frank, if not a Warning. Keep or destroy what I have written, as you will. But please show it to nobody until nobody would mind. And now, good-bye.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">“M.”</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
			<section id="introduction-2">
				<p>There was a tacit compact between Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> and myself that I should visit her at Lyndsey about once a month. Business, indisposition, advancing age, only too frequently made the journey impracticable. But in general, I would at such intervals find myself in her company at her old house, Stonecote; drinking tea with her, gossiping, or reading to her, while she sat in her chair beside my book, embroidering her brilliant tiny flowers and beetles and butterflies with her tiny needle, listening or day-dreaming or musing out of the high window at the prospect of Chizzel Hill.</p>
				<p>At times she was an extremely quiet companion. At others she would rain questions on me, many of them exceedingly unconventional, on a score of subjects at once, scarcely pausing for answers which I was frequently at a loss to give. In a mixed company she was, perhaps, exaggeratedly conscious of her minute stature.</p>
				<p>But in these quiet talks⁠—that shrill-sweet voice, those impulsive little gestures⁠—she forgot it altogether. Not so her visitor, who must confess to having been continually convicted in her presence of a kind of clumsiness and gaucherie⁠—and that, I confess, not merely physical. To a stranger this experience, however wholesome, might be a little humiliating.</p>
				<p>When interested, Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> would sit perfectly still, her hands tightly clasped in her lap, her eyes fixed with a piercing, yet curiously remote, scrutiny. In complete repose, her features lost this keenness, and she became an indescribably beautiful little figure, in her bright-coloured clothes, in the large quiet room. I can think of no comparison that would not seem fanciful. Her self is to some extent in her book. And yet that unique volatile presence, so frail, yet so vigorous, “so very nearly nothing,” in her own whimsical phrase, is only fitfully manifest.</p>
				<p>Naturally enough, she loved solitude. But I am inclined to think she indulged in it to excess. It was, at any rate, in solitude that she wrote her book; and in solitude apparently that her unknown visitor found her, in the following mysterious circumstances.</p>
				<p>The last of our reunions⁠—and one no less happy than the rest⁠—was towards the end of the month of March. On the morning of the following 25th of April I received a telegram summoning me to Lyndsey. I arrived there the same afternoon, and was admitted by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s excellent, but somewhat Dickensian, housekeeper, then already a little deaf and elderly. I found her in extreme distress. It appeared that the evening before, about seven o’clock, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater had heard voices in the house⁠—Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s and another’s. Friendly callers were infrequent; unfamiliar ones extremely rare; and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater confessed that she had felt some curiosity, if not concern, as to who this stranger might be, and how he had gained admission. She blamed herself beyond measure⁠—though I endeavoured to reassure the good woman⁠—for not instantly setting her misgivings at rest.</p>
				<p>Hearing nothing more, except the rain beating at the basement window, at half-past seven she went upstairs and knocked at Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s door. The large, pleasant room⁠—her old nursery⁠—at the top of the house, was in its usual scrupulous order, but vacant. Nothing was disarranged, nothing unusual, except only that a slip of paper had been pinned to the carpet a little beyond the threshold, with this message: “I have been called away.⁠—M.”</p>
				<p>This communication, far from soothing, only increased <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater’s anxiety. She searched the minute Sheraton wardrobe, and found that a garden hat and cape were missing. She waited a while⁠—unlike her usual self⁠—at a loss what to be doing, and peering out of the window. But as darkness was coming on, and Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> rarely went out in windy or showery weather, or indeed descended the staircase without assistance, she became so much alarmed that a little before eight she set out to explore the garden with a stable lantern, and afterwards hurried off to the village for assistance.</p>
				<p>As the reader will himself discover, this was not the first occasion on which Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> had given her friends anxiety. The house, the garden, the surrounding district, her old haunts at Wanderslore were repeatedly submitted at my direction to the most rigorous and protracted search. Watch was kept on the only gipsy encampment in the neighbourhood, near the Heath. Advertisement failed to bring me any but false clues. At length even hope had to be abandoned.</p>
				<p>Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> had been “called away.” By whom? I ask myself: on what errand? for what purpose? So clear and unhurried was the writing of her last message as to preclude, I think, the afflicting thought that her visitor had been the cause of any apprehension or anxiety. An even more tragic eventuality is out of the question. After the events recorded in her last chapter not only had she made me a certain promise, but her later life at Lyndsey had been, apparently, perfectly serene and happy. Only a day or two before she had laughed up at her housekeeper, “Why, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater, there’s not <i>room</i> enough in me for all that’s there!” Nor is it to be assumed that some “inward” voice⁠—her own frequent term⁠—had summoned her away; for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowater immovably maintains that its tones reached her ear, though she herself was at the moment engaged in the kitchen referred to in the first chapter of the Memoirs.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Walter Dadus Pollacke.</p>
					<p>Brunswick House,<br/>
					Beechwood.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
